


| 
| THE COMMUNINGS WITH HIMSELF OF 
| MARCUS AURELIUS 
| ANTONINUS 

: EMPEROR OF ROME 


i TOGETHER WITH HIS SPEECHES AND SAYINGS 
| A REVISED TEXT AND A TRANSLATION 

: INTO ENGLISH BY 

| C. R. HAINES, M.A, FSA. 

| 





LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 


MCMV! 


Ἔν στ ςτὸ πε ET UTES ewe “ge geen CEN re ee ps αν τοι sorte. 
oa i op es apt 4 oe = Rae Be ere καὶ SE A SE κόντισι SERRA περι κιετετοοσει τε, SES EE FETE EGE τὸ χε οσ πε ——— ᾿Ξ sabes oi 


| 
| NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 
i 


i 





EIS BIBAON MAPKOY! 


Εἰ λύπης κρατέειν ἐθέλεις, 
τήνδε μάκαιραν ἀναπτύσσων 

/ 3 , > / 
βίβλον ἐπέρχεο ἐνδυκέως, 
- [2 7 ? / 
ἧς ὑπὸ γνώμην ὀλβίστην 
ῥεῖά κεν ὄψεαι ἐσσομένων 
ὄντων T ἠδὲ παροιχομένων 
τερπωλήν τ᾽ ἀνίην τε -:-λέγων > 
καπνοῦ μηδὲν ἀρειοτέρην. 


Tf thou would’st master care and pain, 

Unfold this book aud read and read again 

Its blessed leaves, whereby thou soon shalt see 
The past, the present, and the days to be 
With opened eyes ; and all delight, all gnief, 
Shall be like smoke, as empty and as brief. 


Μόνος βασιλέων φιλοσοφίαν οὐ λόγοις οὔτε δογμάτων γνώσεσι, 
σεμνῷ δὲ ἤθει καὶ σωφρόνι βίῳ ἐπιστώσατο.----ΕΒΟΡΤΙΑΝ, i. 2, § 4. 


Οὐδὲν αὐτὸν ἐξεβιάσατο ἔξω τι τῶν ἑαυτοῦ OG" πρᾶξαι.---- τὸ 


Cassius 7]. 30, 8 2. 


‘O λογισμὸς αὐτοῦ θεῖος Kal ὡς ἀληθῶς ἄνωθεν ἔχων τὸ παρά- 
δειγμα καὶ πρὸς ἐκείνην ὁρῶν τὴν πολιτείαν. ---- Α ἜΤΒΤΙΌΕΒ, Paneg 
in Cyz. 8 497 (Jebb). 


----..-ὄ.....ς.-΄........ ...............ς-.- 





---.--- -- ...........-.-..--......-.-..-....ς-... ....-.... ..... 


1 This epigram is found at the end of the Vatican MS. and 
also in the Anthologia Palatina, ii. Ὁ. 603 (Jacobs). Possibly 
by Arethas (see P. Maas in Hermes xlviti. p. 295 ff.). 


PREFACE 


Tue Greek text of this book is often difficult and 
in many places corrupt beyond cure, but no trouble 
has been spared to make the translation as accurate 
and idiomatic as possible. I have preferred to err, 
if error it be, on the side of over-faithfulness, 
because the physiognomy of the book owes so much 
to the method and style in which it is written. Its 
homeliness, abruptness, and want of literary finish 
(though it does not lack rhetoric) are part of the 
character of the work, and we alter this character 
by rewriting it into the terse, epigrammatic, 
staccato style so much in vogue at the present day. 
Another reason for literalness is that it makes a 
comparison with the Greek, printed beside it, 
easier for the unlearned. When a work has been 
translated so often as this one, it is difficult to be 
original without deviating further from the text, 
but I have not borrowed a phrase, scarcely a word, 
from any of my predecessors. [If unconscious 
coincidences appear, it remains only to say Pereant 


Vi 


PREEFACK 


gu ante nos nostra daverint! Numerous references 
(such as have proved so invaluable for the due 
understanding of the Bible) and good indices have 
always been greatly wanted in the translations of 
this work, and I have taken pains to supply the 
want. For a better understanding of the character of 
Marcus I have added to the Thoughts translations of 
his Speeches and Sayings, with a Note on his attitude 
towards the Christians (in which I am glad to find 
inyself in complete agreement with M. Lemercicr), 
A companion volume on the Correspondence with 
Frouto will contain all his extant Letters. In con- 
clusion my best thanks are duc to Messrs. Teubner 
for permission to use them text as the basis of the 
revised one here printed, to Professors Leopold and 
Schenk] for advice and help on various points, 
and, last but not least, to my predecessors in the 
translation of this ** Golden Book.” 


C. R. HAINES, 


GODALMING, 1915, 


Vill 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE 
INTRODUCTION 

STOICISM 

ROOK I 

BOOK ΤΙ 

BOOK ΠΕΡ ; 
BOOK Lv. 

BOOK V 

BOOK VI. 

BOOK VII 

BOOK VIII 

BOOK ΙΧ 

Book X 

300K XI 

BOOK ΧΙ 

SPEECITES 

SAYINGS . ως, 

NOTE ON CHRISTIANS 
INDEX OF MATTERS 

INDRX OF PROPER NAMES 


GLOSSARY OF GREEK TERMS . 


PAGE 
Vil 


26 
44 
66 
95 
13 
104 
198 
230 
260 
292 
320 
346 
909 
381 
399 
402 
409 


INTRODUCTION 


Iris not known how this small but priceless book 
of private devotional memoranda! came to be 
preserved for posterity. But the writer that in it 
puts away all desire for after-fame has by means of 
it attained to imperishable remembrance. As 
Rénan has said, “ tous, tant que nous sommes, nous 
portons au coeur le deuil de Mare Auréle comme 
sil était mort dhier.” Internal evidence proves 
that the author was Marcus Antoninus, emperor of 
Rome 7 March 161 to 17 March 180, and notes 
added in one MS between Books I and II and II 
and ΠῚ shew that the second Book was composed 
when the writer was among the Quadi on the 
Gran, and the third at Caruntum (Haimburg). 
The headquarters of Marcus in the war against the 
barbarians were at Carnuntum !71-173, and we 
know that the so-called ‘‘ miraculous victory ” against 
the Quadi was in 174.2 But Professor Schenk] has 
given good reasons for thinking that the first book 
was really written last and prefixed as a sort of 
intreduction to the rest of the work? It was 
probably written as a whole, while the other books 
consist mostly of disconnected jottings. The style 


1 Marcus inay be referring in Bk. TTL. 14 to this lis own 
work as ὑπομνημάτιο, 

2 See Dio, 71. ὃ. 

‘For a discussion of the chronology of the work, sce 
Journal of Philology, vol xxui., No. 66, 1914. 


ΝΕ 


INTRODUCTION 


throughout is abrupt and concise, and words have 
occasionally to be supplied to complete the sense. 
There is here no reasoned treatise on Ethics, no 
exposition of Stoic Philosophy, such as the sectarum 
ardua ac perocculta+ or the ordo praeceptionum,? on 
which Marcus is said to have discoursed before he set 
out the last time for the war in 178, but we have a 
man and a ruler taking counsel with himself, noting 
his own shortcomings, excusing those of others, and 
“whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are 
honourable, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever 
things are pure,’ exhorting his soul to think on 
these things. Never were words written more 
transparently single-hearted and sincere. They 
were not merely written, they were lived. Those 
who accuse Marcus of pharisaism wilfully mistake 
his character and betray their own. Very noticeable 
is the delicacy of the author’s mind and_ the 
restrained energy of his style. He eschews all the 
‘windflowers’ of speech, but the simplicity, straight- 
forwardness, and dignity of his thoughts lend an 
imperial nobility to his expression of them. There 
is a certain choiceness and even poetry in his words 
which amply condone an occasional roughness and 
technicality of phrase. Striking images are not 
infrequent, and such a passage as Book II, 2 is 
unique in ancient literature. This is not a book of 
confessions, and comparatively few allusions to 
personal incidents are to be found except in the 
first book, while an air of complete aloofness and 
detachment pervades the whole. The author ex- 
pressly disclaimns all δριμύτης or originality and 
' Victor de Cues. xvi. 9. 
2 Vule. Gallicanus Vit, Av. Cass. iit. 7. 


Xil 


INTRODUCTION 


acuteness of intellect, and there is a good deal of 
repetition unavoidable in the nature of the work, 
for “line upon line’ and “ precept upon precept” 
ave required in all moral teaching. 

Of his two great Stoic predecessors Mareus has 
no affinity with Seneca. He certainly knew all 
about him and they have many thoughts! in 
common, but Seneca’s rhetorical flamboyance, his 
bewildering contradictions, the glaring divergence 
between his profession and his practice have no 
counterpart in Marcus. Epictetus the Phrygian 
slave was his true spiritual father, but we do not 
πα iu the Kperor the somewhat rigid didacticism 
and spiritual doginatism of his predecessor. Mareus 
is humbler and not so confident. The hardness and 
arrogance of Stoicism are softened m him by an 
infusion of Platonism and other philosophies.2 With 
the Peripatetics he admits the inequality of faults. 
His humanity will not cast out compassion as an 
emotion of the heart.2 His is no cut and dned 
creed, for he often wavers and is consistent. Call 
ποὺ his teaching ineffectual. He is not trying to 
teach anyone. He is reasoning with his own soul 
and championing its cause ayvainst the persuasions 
and impulses of the flesh. How far did he succeed? 
‘By nature a good man,” says Dio, “his education 
and the moral training he imposed upon hinself 

' Marcus never quotes him by name, and though there are 
plenty of similarities between the two writers in thought, 
and even in expression, τὖ is not certain that there is a sinyle 
case of borrowing. Most of the resemblances are based on 
commonplaces; see, however, Sen. Hp. 77 = vi. 2; Hy. 65 = 
xi. 10; de Prov. 4=1v 1; Hp ὅθ τ v.18; de Ben vii. 8} 
= χὰ, 18,§9; Hp. 74=v.8,§38, Hp. 28 =v. 16. 

* Even Epicurus 1s mentioned with approval, ashe is also 
hy Seneca. Sp Mpict. m1. 24,43; Man 16, ete. 

xiii 


IN'PRODOCTION 


made him a tar better one!” ++ As was natural to 
one who had beautified his soul with every virtuous 
quality he was invocent of all weong-doing.” 2 The 
wondertul revelation here given of the ἄσκησις of 
the spiritual athlete in the contests of life is full 
of inspiration still even for Lhe modern world. It 
has been and is a source of solace and strength to 
thousands, and has helped to mould the characters 
of more than one Jeadcr of men, such as Frederick 
the Great,’ Maximilian of Bavaria, Captain John 
Smith, the ‘saviour of Virginia,” and that noble 
Christian soldier, General Gordon. It was but the 
other day, on the fifticth anniversary of [tahan Unity, 
that the Kine of Italy, speaking 4 on the Capitol, 
referred to Marcus “as the sacred and propitiatory 
image of that cult of moral and civil Jaw which our 
Fatherland wishes to follow,’ a reference received 
with particular applause by those who heard it. 

Whoever rescued the MS of the ** Thoughts” on 
the death of thew author in 180, iether it was 
that noble Roman, Pompeianus, the son-in-law of 
Marcus, or the high-aninded Victormus, his lifelong 
frend, we seem to hear an echo of ius teaching m 
the dying words of Cornificia, his possibly last 
surviving danghier, when put to death by Caracalla 
in 215: O wretched little soul of imine, spesence 
in an unworthy body, go forth, be free!’ It was 
doubtless known to Chryseros the freedman and 
nomeuclator of Marcus who wrote a history of Rome 
to the death of his patron,® and to the Emperor 

1 Dio ΤΊ. 35, § 6. 2 Aristides ad Rey. § 106 (Jebb). 

3 Who, however, in the field of morahty cannot be said to 
have profited by its lessons. 


4 March, 1911]. 5 See Dio, Fragm. Dinderf v. 214. 
Ὁ Theoph, ad Autol. via 27. 


XAV 


INTRODUCTION 


Gordian [., for the latter in his youth, soon after the 
Emperor's death, wrote an epic poem on Pius and 
Mareus. He also married Fabia Orestilla, the 
latter’s granddaughter through Fadilla (probably) 
and Claudius Severus. As their eldest son Gordian 
IJ. had sixty children, the blood of Marcus was soon 
widely diffused. 

The first direct mention of the work is about 350 
A.D. in the Orations of the pagan philosopher Themis- 
tius, who speaks of the παραγγέλματα (precepts) of 
Marcus. Then for 550 years we lose sight of the 
book entirely, until, about 900, the compiler of the 
dictionary, which goes by the name of Suidas, reveals 
the existence of a MS of it by making some thirty 
quotations, taken from books I, II], IV, V, IX, and 
Xf. He calls the book (συγγραφή) an ““ἀγωγή (a 
directing) of his own life by Marcus the Emperor in 
twelve books.’’ About the same time Arethas, a 
Cappadocian bishop, writing to his metropolitan, 
speaks of the scarcity of this μεγαλωφελέστατον 
βιβλίον, and apparently sends him a copy of it.? 
He also refers to it three times in scholia to Lucian, 
calling it τὰ εἰς ἑαυτὸν 7Oixa. ‘Two similar references 
are found in the scholia to Dio Chrysostom, possibly 
by the same Arethas. 

Again a silence of 250 years, after which Tzetzes, a 
grammarian of Constantinople, quotes passages from 
Books IV. and V. attributing them to Marcus. About 
150 years later (1300 a.p.) the ecclesiastical historian, 
Nicephorus Callistus (111. 31) writes that Marcus 
“ composed a book of instruction for his son, full of 
universal (κοσμικῆς, ἢ secular) experience and 
wisdom.’’, About this very time Planudes, a monk 


1 See Index, under ‘‘Suidas.” ¢Sce A. Sonny im ΡΛ οί, 54, 1821, 
xV 


INTRODUCTION 


of Constantinople, may have been, engaged im com- 
piling the anthology of extracts from various authors, 
including Marcus and Aclian, which has come down 
to us in twenty-five or more MSS dating froin the 
fourteenth to the sixteenth century! They are 
practically of no help in re-establishing the text,? and 
contain in all forty-four extracts from books IV.—-XIL. 

Our present text is based almost entirely upon two 
MSS, the Codex Palatinus (P) first prmted m 1558 
by Xylander but now lost, which contains the whole 
work, and the Codex Vaticanus 1950 (A) from which 
about forty-two lines have dropped out by accidental 
onussions here and there. J'wo other MSS give some 
independent help to the text, but they are incom- 
plete, the Codex Darmstadtmus 2773 (1D) with 112 
extracts from books L-DX. and Codex Parismus 319 
(C) with twenty-nine extracts from Books L-lV., 
with seven other MSS derived from αὖ or from the same 
source. Apart from all these there is but one other 
MS (Monacensis 323) which contains only fourteen 
very short fragments from Books IL, LI1.,1EV., and VII. 

‘Translations of this Book have been made itto 
Latin, English, French, [talian, German, Spanish, 
Norse, Russian, Czech, Polish and Persian. In 
England alone twenty-six editions of the work 
appeared in the seventeenth century, fifty-eight in the 
eighteenth, eighty-one in the nineteenth, Ae in the 
twentieth up to 1908 thirty more.® 


The English translations are as follows.— 
1. Merte Casaubon.—“ Marcus Aurelius Antoninus 
His Meditations concerning himselfe: ‘Treating of a 


1 One (Vat. 2231) has Just come to light. 
2 Except Cod. Monacensis 2 = U. Hoeschelianus. 
3 Seed. W. Legg, A Liblioyraphy of Murcus Aurelius, 1908. 


Xvi 


INTRODUCTION 


Naturall Man’s sHappinesse ; wherein it consisteth, 
and of the Meanes to attain unto it. Translated 
out of the original Greeke with Notes by Meric 
Casanbon B.D. a Tandon: 1634.” 

This, the fivst English translation, albeit involved 
aud periphrastic, is not without dignity or scholarship, 
though James Thomson in 1747 says that “it is every- 
where rude and unpolished and often mistakes the 
author’s meaning,’ while the Foulis Press Translators 
of 1742 find fault with its “intricate and antiquated 
style.” It may be conveniently read in Dr. Rouse’s 
new edition of 1900, which also contains some ex- 
cellent translations of letters between Fronto and 
Mareus. 

2. Jeremy Collier.—“ The Emperor Marcus Anton- 
inus His Conversation with Himself. Translated 
into English by Jeremy Collier M.A., London 1701.” 
A recent edition of it by Alice Zimmern is in the 
Cainelot Series, but it hardly deserved the honour. 
We may fairly say of it that it is too colloquial. 
James Thomson in 1747 speaks of it as “a very coarse 
copy of an excellent original,” and as “bearing so 
faint a resemblance to the original in a great many 
places as scarcely to seem taken from it” ἰδ, Graves 
in 1792 remarks that 1t “abounds with so many 
vulgarities, anilities and even ludicrous expressions 

vehat one cannot now read it with any patience. 
The comment of G. Long in 1862 is much the same, 
but it called forth an unexpected champion of the 
vldcr translator in Matthew Arnold, who says: 
“Most English people, who knew Marcus Aurelius 
betore Mr. Long appeared as his introducer, knew 
him through Jeremy Collier. And the acquaintance 
of a man like Marcus Aurelius is such an imperishable 


xvid 


b 


IN PRODUCTION 


benefit that one can never lose a peculiar sense of 
obligation towards the inan who confers it. Apart 
from this however, Jeremy Collier's version deserves 
respeet for its genume spit and vigour, the spirit 
and vigour of the age of Dryden His warmth of 
fecling gave to tis style an unpetuosily and rhythm 
which cone hit Long’ 5 style are absent.” The real 
defect of Collier as a translator, adds Arnold, is his 
unpertecl acquaintance with Greek, 

3 James Jfoor and Lhomas Llutcheson.—* The 
Meditations of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius Anton- 
inus. Newly translated from the Greek with notes.” 
Glasgow : The Foulis Press, 1742. Certainly the 
best translation, previous to Long’s, for accuracy and 
diction, and superior to that in spirit. Dr. Rendall 
(1898) praises 1b as “the choicest alike m= fom and 
contents.” ἃ. Graves, however, i L792, while 
allowing its fidelity, had pronounced it "6 unnecessarily 
literal,” and shewing a “total neglect of elegance 
and harmony of style.” A very satisfactory revision 
of this translation appeared in 1902, made by G. W. 
Chrystal. 

4. Richard Graves-—“ The Meditations of the 
Emperor Mareus Aurelius Antonmus. A New 
Translation from the Greek Original, with netes.” 
By R. Graves, M.A., Rector of Claverton, Somerset. 
Bath, 1792. 

A fairly accurate and smooth version of no 
especial distinction, but superior to most of its 
predecessors. An abbreviated edition of this was 
published at Stourport without any date by N. Swaine 
with the title: “The Meditations of the Emperor 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Philosophus collated with 
and abridged from the best translations.” 


ΧΗ 


INTRODUCTION 


George Lony —“ The Thoughts ot the Emperor 
Marcus Aurelius Autoninus.” Translated by George 
Long. London, 1862. This may be looked upon as 
in some sense the “authorized version,’ and it is 
from it that most people know their Marcus Aurelius. 
For nearly forty years it was master of the field. 
M. Arnold, though finding fault with the translator 
as not idiomatic or simple enough and even pedantic, 
yet gives him full credit for soundness, precision, 
and wveneral excellence in his translation. The 
author tells us that he deliberately chose a ruder 
style as better suited to express the character of 
the original, and he was right, for in spite of Arnold’s 
dictum to the contrary the book of Marcus has 
a “distinct physiognomy,’ and here, more than is 
usually the case, /e slyle c’est homme. 

6. Haslnys Crossley.—* The Fourth Book of the 
Meditations of Marcus Aurelius.” <A revised text with 
Translation and commentary by Hastings Crossley, 
M.A., London, 1882. This specimen makes us 
regret that the author did not publish the whole 
version which he tells us was in MS. The book 
contains an interesting appendix on the relations 
of Fronto and Mareus. 

7. G. Ἡ. Rendall.—“< Marcus Aurelius Antoninus 
to Himself: An English Translation with Intro- 
ductory Study on Stoicism and the Last of the 
Sioics.” By Gerald H. Rendall, M.A., Litt.D., 
London, 1898. A second edition with a different 
introduction was published in 1901. 

This version has been pronounced by many critics 
the best rendering of the Thoughis. Its accuracy, 
ability, and liveliness are unquestionable. 

8. John Jackson.— “The Meditations of Marcus 


XIX 


INTRODUCTION 


Aurelius Antoninus.” Translated by John Jackson 
With an introduction by Charles Bigg. Oxford, 
1906. 

This version is the newest comer, and is a worthy 
presentment of the ZLhoughis. There are useful 
notes, but some very bold alterations of the text 
have been followed in the English version. The 
book would have been more acceptable without 
the introduction by Dr. Bigg, which @eives a most 
unfair and wholly maccurate view of the life and 
character of Marcus. 

Besides the above versions there are several 
abridged translations of the Zhoughis, which need 
not be enumerated here. But the two chief ones 
seem to be by B. Ἰὼ Smith, published by the Centary 
Company, New York, 1899, and by J. Ἰὼ Wilson, 
London, 1905. 


STOICISM 


Sroicism was so called from the Colonnade! at 
Athens, where Zeno about 300 n.c. first taught its 
doctrines. More religious in character than any 
other Greek philosophy, it brought a new moral 
force into the world. It put intellectual speculation 
more into the background, and carried the moral 
attitude of the Cynics further into the domain of 
right conduct. Oriental fervour was in it grafted 
on Greek acumen, for Zeno was a Phoenician Greek 
of Cyprus, and Chrysippus, the St. Paul who defined 
and established 3 Stoicism, a Cilician like the Apostle. 

In spite of its origin Stoicism proved wonderfully 
adapted to the practical Roman character, and under 
the tyranny of the early Caesars it formed the only 
impregnable fortress? of liberty for the noblest 
Romans. It reached its culmination, and found its 
highest exponents as a living creed in the courtier 
Seneca, the Phrygian slave Epictetus, and the 
emperor Marcus Antoninus. 

Stoic philosophy consisted of Logic, Physics, and 
Ethies.¢ Logic, which comprised Dialectics and 


᾿ Στοὰ ποικίλη. 

2 εἰ μὴ γὰρ ἣν Χρύσιππος, οὐκ ἂν a Στοά, an anonymous 
verse quoted by Diog. Laert. Chrys. 5 

3 villi. 41, 48, 4 vin. 13. 


XX] 


STOICISM 


Rhetoric, was the ueeessary instrument of all 
speculation εἰ but Mareus found no satisfaction in 
either branch of it, nor in such Physics as dealt 
with Meteorology 7 

The key-note of Stoicism was Life according to 
Naiure, and Marcus was converted to the pursuit 
of this possibly by Sextus the Boeotian.  B 
“Nature” was meant the controlling Reason of the 
Universe.! A study of Physics was necessary for a 
proper understanding of the Cosmos and our position 
in it, and thus formed the scientific basis of philosophy; 
but if was regarded as strictly subordinate, aud 
merely a means to an end. 

Though he confesses to some disappointinent in his 
progress therei,® there is no doubt that Marcus was 
well versed in Stoic Physics. Fully reeog@niwing the 
value of a scientific spirit of enquiry ,° he deseribes it 
as a characteristic of the rational soul to “90 the 
whole Universe through and grasp its plan,’? 
affirming that “no man ean be good without correct 
notions as to the Nature of the Whole and his own 
constitution.” ὃ 

To the Stoics the Universe—God and Matter ἢ. -was 
One, all Substance, unified by the close ‘sympathy’ 1 
and interdependence of the parts, forming with the 
rational Power, thal was co-extensive with it, a single 
entity. The Primary Being, by means of its intorm- 

1 See pict. 1. 17. 

31. ἢ, 17, 8 43 vil. 67; vin. 1. 


31 9, 8], 17, §5. But Rusticus G. 7) and Maximus 
(i. 15) were his chief instructors in Stoicism 


4 νχὶ 1]. 5 wij. 67. 
Ox {ΠῚ xed. 82 
8 viii 52; xi. 3. 9 αἴτιον and ὕλη. 


WAV 27 Vs 20 5 AKO, 8 3, 
Xxil 


STOICISM 


ing Force,! acting as igneous or atmospheric current 3 
upon mert matter, evolved out of itself a Cosmos, 
subsequent modifications being by way of con- 
sequence.? This Universe is periodically destroyed 
by fire,tthus returning again to its pristine Being, 
only however to be created anew’ on the same 
plan even to the smallest details; and su on for 
ever. 

God and Matter being thus indistinguishable, for 
all that was not God in its original form was God in 
an indirect sense as a manifestation of him, the 
Stoic creed was inevitably pantheistic. It was also 
materialistic ; for the Stoies, allowing existence to 
nothing incorporeal, by means of their strange theory 
of air-currents ὃ inherent even in abstract things such 
ag virtue, rendered not only them but God himself 
corporeal, terming him the “ perfect living Being.” 7 
But their conceptions on this point seem to be really 
irreconcilable, for while on the one hand they speak 
of the Supreme Power by such naines as Zeus, Cause 
or Force, Soul, Mind, or Reason of the Universe, 
Law or Truth, Destiny, Necessity, Providence, or 
Nature of the Whole, on the other they identify it 
with such terms as Fiery Fluid, or Heat, Ether 
(warm air) or Pneuma (atmospherie current). 


1 σπερματικὸς λόγος (used by Justi of Christ), iv. 14, 21; 
vi. 243 ix. Lad fn. 

2 πνεῦμα, This set up tension (τόνος), resulting in expan- 
sion and contraction (cp. ow attraction and repulsion) and 
gave to things shape quality, and relation. 

ὄν, 36, §2; 1x. 1, § 4. 

ἄν, 13, 32; x. 7. The doctrine of érmbpwois was Hera- 
chtan ep St. Peter, Ep u 3,7; Justin, ipo. 1. 203 n. 7. 

° παλιγγενεσία, vi. 19; xi. 1. cy. St. Matt. xix. 28. 

0 πνεύματα. 7 1v. 40; x. 1. 


STOLCISM 


Other physical theories were borrowed from Flera- 
elitus, and Mareus constantly ἃ alludes to these, such as 
the “ downward and upward ’ round of the elements ! 
as they emanate from the primary Fire, air passing 
into fire, fire into earth, earth into water and so back 
again,? and the famous doctrine that all things are in 
flux.? 

Man consists of Body, Soul, Intelligence, or Flesh, 
Pneuia, and the Rulmg Re: ison. Bat the ψυχή 
(soul) can be looked upon in’ two ways, as 
πνευμάτιον, an exhalation from blood,” and as ἡ νοερά, 
ἡ λογικὴ ψυχή, 1.6 the ruling Reason. Jet is the 
latter, a “morsel” or © cfHua’’ ® from Lhe Divine, which 
constitutes the real man. Marcus often speaks of 
this rational nature? of a man as Ins dacmon, or 
gemus enthroned within him,* and makes the whole 
problem of life depend upon how this Reason treats 
itself, GAs all that is rational is akin, we are formed 
for fellowship with others and, the an erse bemg one, 
what affects a part of it affects the whole. Reason 
is asa Law to all rational crealures, and so we are all 
citizens of a World-state.” In this cosmopolitanism 
the Stoics approached the Christian wiew, ethics 
being divorced from national polties and made of 
universal application. It was no cloistered virtue the 
Stoics preached, showing how a inan can. save his 
own soul, but a practical positive goodness 31° though 
it cannot be denicd that the claims of αὐτάρκεια 


1 ἄνω κάτω. Wi. 173 1X 2S. 2 av. 46. 

3 ἅπαντα ῥεῖ, u. 17; iv. Sad fin., 86; v. 10; νι. 133 vu. 25; 
1χ. 19; χ. 7. Ἔτη, ΤῸ ; χα, ἢ. 

ὅν, 333 vi. 1ὅ, or ζωή, an inhalation from the air. 

Say Ly 1 ae Me 97, Pere 1. 

8.173 1.7,163; 7 27, ete., and he calls this God, τὰ. 5; 
v. 10; xu. 26. 2 ᾿ ᾿4. Movi, 80. 


XX1V 


STOICISM 


(the self-sufficiency of the Inner Self) aud κοινωνία 
(social interdependence of parts of a common whole) 
are not easy to reconcile. It is certain, however, 
that the Stoic admission of slaves into the brother- 
hood of man had an ameliorating effect upon slavery, 
and the well-known bias of Marcus in favour of 
enfranchisement may well have been due to his 
creed.! 

From virtue alone can happiness and peace of 
mind result, and virtue consists in submission to the 
higher Power and all that he sends us, in mastery over 
our animal nature, in freedom from all perturbation,? 
and in the entire independence of the Inner Self. Since 
life is Opinion? and everything but what we think 
it, the vital question is what assent we give to the 
impressions of our senses. “ Wipe out imagination,” 
says Marcus, time after time, “and you are saved.”! 
“Do not think yourself hurt and you remain 
unhurt.”° He longs for the day when he shall 
cease to be duped by his impressions and pulled like 
a puppet by his passions,® and lis soul shall be in a 
ereat calm. But virtue must also show itself, like 
faith, in right actions It means not only self- 
control but justice and benevolence to others and 
piety towards the Gods. 

By the Gods Marcus sometimes means the con- 
trolling Reason,’ sometimes, apparently, Gods in a 
more popular sense, such as are even visible to the 


Ὁ See Diyest, xxvii. 4. 3. 2 ἀταραξία, ix. 31. 

3 iv. ὦ; vu. 17; χι. 18, § 7, ete. 

xT 5 OM, Ts 

θη, ὃν: in. 163 vi. 16, οὖς, 

7 an. 6s vi. 445 vin. 17; iu. 33 1x. 1 He even calls the 
Supreme Nature πρεσβυτάτη τῶν θεῶν, 1x. 1, 


χχν 


STOTCISM 


eyes.! He often puts the alternative God (or Gods) 
and Atoms,? but himself firmly believes that there 
are mmortal Gods? who care for mankind, live 
with them, and help even bad men.t He bids 
himself call upon them, follow them,’ be their 
minister, live with them and be likened to them. 
They too are part of the Cosmos and subject to its 
limitations, and by our own loyalty to Destiny we 
contribute to the welfare and permanence of God 
himself. But a predestined Order of things involved 
fatalism, and the Stoics were hard put to it to 
maintain the complete freedom of the will. 

Unfortunately the Stoic scheme left no room for 
Immortality. Atmosta soul could only exist till the 
next conflagration, when it must be absorbed again 
into the Primary Being. Seneca indeed, who was no 
true Stoic, speaks in almost Christian terms of a 
new and blissful life to come,’ but Epictetus turns 
resolutcly, and Mareus with evident reluctance, from 
a hope so dear to the huinan heart. In one place 
the latter even uses the expression “ another life,” ὃ 
and finds it a hard saying that the souls of those who 
were in closest communion with God should die for 
ever when they die.® But he does not repme. He 
is ready for either fate, extinction or transference 
elsewhere.!° 

One more question remaims, that of Suicide. The 
Stoics allowed this, if circumstances made it im- 


1 χη], 283 ΗΠ, 163 vii. 19: ὁ ἥλιος καὶ of Ἀοιποὶ θεοί. 
: IE 8,89 ; te 17; x1. 18, § 1. sab 
3 ai. 11; vit. 70. ix. 11, 27, 40. 
° A Stoic precept. θυ ep, Juhan, Conv 421 
7 Hp. 54,1023 Polyb Consol. 28; ad Mureiam, 25, 
Sl 3. 9 xu. 5 
OTe BS a8 SRI le 
XXVl 


STOICISM 


possible for a man to maintain his moral standard.! 
The door is open, but the call must be very clear.” 
Still the act seems quite inconsistent with the 
doctrine of submission to Destiny, and the classing 
of things external as indifferent. 

In this brief sketch of Stoicism much has perforce 
been omitted, and much may seem obscure, but 
Marcus confesses that “things are in a manner so 
wrapped up in mystery that even the Stoics have 
found them difficult to apprehend.”? This at 
least we know, that Stoicism inspired some of 
the noblest lves ever hved. left its) humanizing 
impress upon the Roman Law, which we have 
inherited, and appeals in an especial way to some of 
the higher instincts of our nature. 

bee BN: INe es 
2x1 83 Epiet. 1. 29, 825, αν 2b ad pn 3 i 138, § 1s. 
ihe tO), 


XXVH 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Of the chief editions and commentaries referred to in the 
critical notes. 


Xyl.-The premier edition from the lost Palatine M&s., 
issued in 1558, with a Latin translation by Xylancder 
(2.6 W. Holzmann of Augsbury). 

Cus —Meric Casaubon’s first edition of the omgmal Greek 
in 1643. Reprinted 1680. 

(fut —Thonas Gataker’s edition, publshed im 1652 at 
Cambridge with a new Latin version and voluminous 
notes including contiibutions from Saumuise (Salm.), 
Boot, and Junius. Reprinted 1696, 1704, 1707, 1729 
(Wolle and Bucldeus), 1744, 1751, 1775 (Alors) 

Sch. —Jo. Matth Schultz Editions 1802 (Sleswig), 1820) 
(Leipzig), 1842 (Paris)  sdlenayits and Retske supplied 
notes to Schultz. 

Cor.—A Coraes, vol iv. : πάρεργα τῆς βιβλιοθήκης Ἕλλην- 
ικῆς. Paris, 1816 This editor has made more successtul 
emendations of the teat than any other. 

Buch —-Nicholas Bach, ‘‘De Marco Aurelio Antonine.” 
Lipsiae, 1826 

Pierron.—Alexis Pierron, ‘‘ Pensées de PEmpcrvenr Mare 
Auréle Antonin.” Paris, 18438 (with introduction and 
notes), 

Loft.—Eadition by C. Τῷ, Porcher (=Capel Lofft), New 
York, 1863. Proof-shcets of this, with additional notes, 
are in the British Museum. 

Scaph —Panag. Schaphidiotes, “‘ Kpirucal Παρατηρήσεις ἐπὶ 
τῶν eis ἑαντὸν ιβ΄ βιβλίων Μάρκου Αντωνίνου." Athens, 
188] 

Stich.—Jo. Stich, ‘‘ Adnotationés criticae ad M Antoninum,”’ 
Proyramm der K. Studienanstatt, Zweibrachen, 1880, 

The same editor brought out an edition for the Teubner 
Series in 1882, and a second revised edition in 1903, 
with valuable introductions and index. 


ry 





XXX 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Newek.—Angust Nauck, * De M. Antonine Cominentatius,’ 
S82, δε οί εν de Cilcaomee enpcoriate des Serences de St 
Petershoury (28), pp Ιθ0- 10 See also Alelanges 
ee τ 1740)- ὃ, 

Pol. —Hennann εἰ Polak “ἢ fn Mare: Antoni (οἰ 18 
analecta critica,” //ermes \\1 (580), pp 821-856, and 
Sylloye comimertationum oe CL Conio vbtiderunt phito- 
logit βία, Lugd. Bat., 1804, pp δ5-9: 

Rend.—ti FE, Rend, “On the text of M. Aurelius Anton- 
mus τὰ εἰς ἑαυτύν, SJonrnel of Philology, rsi., 
pp. 16-160 

Welaa.— Ulich de Wailamowitz-Moclendort, Grechisches 
Lesebuch u., pp. 3b)-520 0 Berlin, 1902. 

Hojim.--P Hotimann, ‘‘ Notes eritiqgues sur Mare Auréle,” 
Reene de Cinotruction publique on Belyeque, <ivar, 190,4, 
pp. li-2o. 

Souny.-- Adolf Sonny, ‘Zur Ucberliclerung Geechichte von 
M.A,” Philologius δά, pp. 181-3. 

Leop—dJ. H. Leopold, “Ad Mo Antonin commmentatios.” 
Mnemosyne <xx1., 1902, pp 341-308, xxatv., P07, pp. 
3-82. He also brought out a new edition of the Greek 
me) for the Clarendon Press in 1911. 

Fourn.—Paul Fournier, ‘ Penséces de Mare Aurele.”  Tea- 
duction Δ᾽ Auguste Couat cdiiée par P Fournier — Paris, 
1904. There are numerous notes. 

Peich.—Flerbert Richards, ‘‘ Notes on Mareus Aurelius, 
Classical Review, xix , Feb. 1905, pp. 18-21. 

Kron.—aA. J. Kronenberg, “Ad M. Antoninuin,” Classica/ 
Reriwew, xis., July, 1905, pp. 801-3 

Schnudt --Karl Fr. W. Schmidt, ‘* Textkrtische Bemer- 
kungen zu Mark Aurel,” //ermes, li. 1907, pp. 595-607. 

Lemere —A, P Temercier, ‘ Les Pensées de Mare Au dle, 
Paris, 1910, with notes and a good intioduetion, 

Schenk/,—fleintich Senenkl, a new editron of the WhougAts 
for the Teubner Press, 1913. The latest and most 
complete edition with valuable introductions and full 
indices. The same HKditor has also published ‘ Zur 
handscrifthchen Ueberheferung von Marcus Antoninus ” 
(Hranos Vandobonensis, 1893), and “Zum erste Buche 
des Sclbstbetrachtungen des Katsers Marcus Antonmus Ὁ 
(Wiener Studien, 1912). 


XXX 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ffaines,— Ος R. Haines, “ἘΠ. Composition and Chronology of 
the Jhoughts of Marcus Aurelius,” Journal of Philoloyy, 
vol. xxxin., No. 66, pp. 278-295 
For the rae and doctrines of Stoicism besiles the 
standard worl: of Zeller and the recent treatise on ὁ Roman 
Stoicism * by E. V. Arnold, the following will be found 
useful :—N. Bach (mentioned above) 1826; H. Doergens, 
“de comparatione Antoninianae plulosophiae cum L. Annaei 
Senecae,” 1816; the admirable essay on Stoicisin by G. H. 
Rendall pr efixed to his edition of 1898; < Greek and Roman 
Stoiasm ” hy OC. H. 8. Davis, 1903 ; and Stoic and Chistian ἢ 
by Leonard Alston, 1906 


P = Codex Palatinus (Xylander), - Τ (Schenkh 
A τ Codex Vaticanus 1950. 
C = Codex Parisinus 310. 

edad 


D = Codex Darmstadtinus 2773. 
Mo* -- Codex Monachensis (Munich) 529 


< > Words thus enclosed are mserted by conjecture 

{ ] Words in the text which should probably be onutted 
f = Doubttul readings in the tert. 

‘mark quotations οὐ words of a speaker. 


1} proverbial, colloquial, or poetical expressions 


XXNXH 


MARCUS AURELIUS 
ANTONINUS 


MAPKOY AYPHAIOY ANTONINOY 


ATTOKPATOPOX 


TON EES BAYTON 


BIBAION A 


f 


F la , \ f 
α΄. apa τοῦ πάππου Οὐήρου, τὸ καλύηθες 
, 
Kal ἀόργητον. 
β΄. llapa τῆς δόξης καὶ μνήμης τῆς περὶ τοῦ 
γεννήσαντος, TO αἰδῆμον καὶ ὠρρενικόν. 
γ΄. "Παρὰ τῆς μητρός, τὸ θεοσεβὲς καὶ μετα- 
δοτικόν: καὶ ἀφεκτικὸν οὐ μόνον τοῦ κακοποιεῖν. 
” 
ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ ἐπὶ ἐννοίας γίνεσθωι τοιαύτης" ἔτι 
\ “ “ 
δὲ TO λιτὸν κατὰ τὴν δίαιταν καὶ πόρρω τῆς 
πλονυσιακῆς διαγωγῆς. 
δ΄ TI \ ΩΝ 7 Ν \ b] ὃ ΄ ᾿Ξ 
; apa τοῦ προπάππου, τὸ μὴ εἰς δημοσίας 
\ a \ Ν 2 “ ΄ 
διατριβὰς φοιτῆσαι, καὶ τὸ ἀγαθοῖς διδασκάλοις 
9 Ta e \ 
Kat οἶκον χρήσασθαι, καὶ TO γνῶναι, OTL εἰς TH 
τοιαῦτω δεῖ ἐκτενῶς ἀναλίσκειν. 


1 se. “Thad an exaniple of,” *S was m the way to learn.’ 
But the construction varies and sometimes a direct statement 
of characteristics is given It 1s obvious that Marcus does 
not clan to possess all the good qualities enumerated 

2 Died betore 180, The grandfather of M. (§ 1) died 


tN 


MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS 
THE EMPEROR 


TO HIMSELF 


BOOK |! 


1, From my Granpratuer Verus,t a kindly dis- 
position and sweetness of temper. 

2, From wHar I nearp or M\ FaTaer*? aNp MY 
MEMORY OF UIM, Modesty and manliness. 

3. From my Morter, the fear of God, and 
generosity ; and abstention not only from doing ill 
but even from the very thought of doing it; and 
furthermore to live the simple life,® far removed from 
the habits of the rich. 

+. From my Granprarner’s Fatumr,* to dispense 
with attendance at public schools, and to enjoy good 
teachers at home,’ and to recognize that en such 
things money should be eagerly spent. 
aged nearly 90 in 138 (Capit. Vat. dfan. vi. 11, Pet. 
Piviv. 2). 

2 en, Aristides, ad Rey. §115 (Jebb) διαίτης εὐτέλεια (οἵ 
Marcus). 

+ Oatihus Severus, pruef. wrbz, who hoped to succeed 
Hadrian (Spart. Met. Made νι 105 xxiv. 6) 

5 Capit. Vel Ala. (αι. 3-111. +) gives a list of these. 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τ. Hapa τοῦ TPUPEOS, Τὸ μὴτε ᾿ρασιανὸς 

μήτε Bevetiares, μητε [ἸΙαλμουλάριος ἢ δ χουτ- 
άριος γενέσθαι" καὶ τὸ | pepemoror καὶ ὀλιγοδείς, 
καὶ τὸ αὐτουργικὸν καὶ ἀπολύπρωγμον' καὶ τὸ 
δυσπρόσδεκτον δια βολῆς. 
ς-. Παρὰ Διυγνήτου, τὸ ἀκενόσπουδον' καὶ τὸ 
ἀπιστητικὸν τοῖς ἱ πὸ τῶν τερατευομένων καὶ γοητ- 
ων περὶ ἐπῳδῶν καὶ περὶ δαιμόνων. ἀποπομπῆς 
καὶ τῶν τοιούτων λεγομέν οἱς" καὶ τὸ μὴ ὀρτυγο- 
τροφεῖν, μηδὲ περὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα “ἐπτοῆσθαι' καὶ τὸ 
ἀνέχεσθαι παρρησίας" καὶ τὸ οἰκειωθῆναι φιλο- 
σοφίᾳ καὶ τὸ ἀκοῦσαι πρῶτον μὲν Βακχείου, εἶτα 
Τανδάσιδος καὶ ΔιΙαρκιανοῦ Τ' καὶ τὸ γρώψαι 
διαλόγους ἐν παιδί: καὶ τὸ σκίμποδος καὶ δορᾶς 
ἐπιθυμῆσαι καὶ ὅσα τοιαῦτα τῆς “Ιλληνικῆς 
ἀγωγῆς ἐχόμενα. 

ξι Tapa ‘Povo tixou, τὸ λαβεῖν φαντασίαν 
τοῦ χρήζειν διορθώσεως καὶ θεραπείας τοῦ ἤθους: 
καὶ τὸ μὴ ἐκτραπῆναι. εἰς ζῆλον σοφιστικόν, μηδὲ 
τὸ συγγράφειν περὶ τῶν θεωρημάτων, ἢ προτρεπ- 
τικὰ λογάρια διαλέγεσθαι, ἢ φαντασιοπλήκτως 
τὸν ἀσκητικὸν ἢ τὸν εὐεργετικὸν ἄνδρα ἐπιδείκνυ- 
σθαι; καὶ τὸ ἀποστῆναι ῥητορικῆς καὶ ποιητικῆς 
καὶ ἀστειολογίας" καὶ τὸ μὴ ἐν στολῇ KAT οἶκον 








1 The name has perhaps dropped out. Capit Wit, Puen ὃ 
has an anecdote of the death of the educator οἱ Marcus, but 
Aristides mm lis funeral oration on Alexander of Cotiaeuin 
calls the latter not only διδάσκαλος but τροφεὺς to Marcus 
aud Verus (Jebb’s Hd. § 149). But he is mentioned helow 
§ 10. 

2 Capit. Vil. Ver. vi 2; Malalas xi. ad jin. 

* Dio (71. 6, § 2) calls M. φιλόπονος. 

1 A Diognetus taught M. pamting (Capit. iv. 9). 
5 eo, Capit. xin. 6; Dio 71. 9, § 2 (Xiphilinus) 


BOOK I 


5. From my Tutor, not to side with the Green 
Jacket or the Blue- at the races, or to back the 
Light-Shield Champion or the Heavy-Shield in the 
lists ; not to shirk toil, and to have few wants, 
and to domy own work, and mind my own concerns; 
and to turn a deaf ear to slander. 

6. From Diognerus,t not to be taken up with 
lrifles; and not to give credence to the statements 
of imiracle-nongers and wizards® about incantations 
and the exorcizmg of demons,® and such-like 
marvels ; and not to keep quails, nor te be excited 
about such things: not to resent plain speaking ; 
and to become familiar wrth philosophy and be a 
hearer first of Baccheius, then of Tandasis and 
Marcianus; and to write dialugues as a boy; and 
to set my heart on a pallet-bed and a pelt’ and 
whatever else tallied with the Greek regimen. 

From Rusticus,® to become aware of the fact 
Lhat £ needed amendment and training for my char- 
acter; and not to be led eside into an argumentative 
sophistry ; nor compose treatises on speculative sub- 
jects, or deliver hitle honulics,® or pose ostentatiously 
as the moral athlete or unselfish man; and to eschew 
rhetoric’? poetry, and fine language: and not to go 


§ Undoubtedly refers to the Christians, see Diyes’ L 13.4, 
$3, and cp. dustin, vol αι, Got Rometitself The Christians 
constantly boasted of thuir power to exorcize - Tert. pol. 

Tren. τι. 6, § 2; Lact. ν. 21. ep. also the legend of 
Abercius and lus visit to Rome to enre Lucilla. 

7Camt. Vit. Maru 

δ, 17, 884, 6. en. Digest xlin 1 1, $3 ‘* Vusticus, our 
friend”; Capit. m1 3; Them Oval ani. ἔτ ες Fronto, ad 
alat. 1 2. 3 λογάρια (reafuucalae). p Hypict. 1. 29. δῦ. 

Wy TT, 8 4 ep) KFronte, ed ules ὦ (Nab, p. 96); 
Hloqu 38 (Nab. p 150). Dio (71 35,8 1) says Mo was ἀτκηθεὶς 
ἐν τοῖν ῥητορικοῖς ADYatS. 


τι 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


περιπατεῖν, μηδὲ τὰ τοιαῦτα ποιεῖ" καὶ τὸ τὰ 
ἐπιστόλια ἀφελῶς γράφειν. οἷον τὸ UT αὐτοῦ 
τούτου ἀπὸ Σινοέσσης τῇ μητρί μου γραφέν' 
καὶ τὸ πρὸς τοὺς χαλεπήναντας καὶ πλημμελή- 
TUVTAS εὐανακλήτως καὶ εὐδιαλλάκτως, ἐπειδὰν 
τάχιστα αὐτοὶ ἐπανελθεῖν ἐθελήσωσι, δια- 
κεῖσθαι" καὶ τὸ ἀκριβῶς ἀναγινώσκειν καὶ μὴ 
ἀρκεῖσθαι περιοοῦντα ὁλοσχερῶς: μηδὲ τοῖς 
περιλαλοῦσι ταχέως συγκατατίθεσθαι: καὶ τὸ 
ἐντυχεῖν τοῖς ᾿ἰὑπικτητείοις ὑπομνήμασιν, ὧν 
οἴκοθεν μετέδωκεν. 

η΄. Hapa ᾿Απολλωγίου, TO ἐλεύθερον καὶ 
ἀναμφιβόλως ἀκύβευτον" καὶ “πρὸς μηδὲν ἄλλο 
ἀποβλέπειν μηδὲ ἐπ᾽ ὀλίγον ἢ πρὸς TOV oyou: 
καὶ TO ἀεὶ ὅμοιον. ἐν ἀλγηδόσιν ὀξείαις, ἐν, atro- 
βολῇ τέκνου, ἐν" μακραῖς νόσοις' καὶ τὸ ἐπὶ 
παραδείγματος ζῶντος ἰδεῖν ἐναργῶς, ὅτι δύναται 
0 αὐτὸς σφοδρότατος εἶναι καὶ ἀνειμένος" καὶ 
τὸ ἐν ταῖς ἐξηγήσεσι μὴ δυσχεραντικόν" καὶ 
τὸ ἰδεῖν ἄνθρωπον σαφῶς ἐλάχιστον τῶν ἑαυτοῦ 
καλῶν ἡ ἡγούμενον τὴν ἐμπειρίαν καὶ τὴν ἐντρέχ- 
εἰαν τὴν περὶ τὸ παραδιδόναι. τὰ θεωρήματα: 
καὶ τὸ μαθεῖν, πῶς δεῖ λαμβάγειν τὰς δοκούσας 
χάριτας παρὰ φίλων, μήτε ἐξηττώμενον διὰ 
ταῦτα μήτε ἀναισθήτως παραπέμποντα. 

0’. Tapa Σέξτου, τὸ εὐμενὲς: καὶ τὸ παρά- 


1 As Mareus in the case of Herodcs, see Philost. rut. Sipll: 
n 12 (Kayser’s ed. p. 243) 

29, Pronto, ad “π᾿ v. 36. Capit. (Vit, δὴν x. 4) and 
Lucian (Demonar 3 31) shew hin om ἃ different light, as 
i-mannered and avamcions. Heis mentioned as ᾿Αντωνίνου 
éraipos hy Hprphanius 

' See the behaviour of Marcus on the death of M. Annius 


6 


BOOK I 


about the house in my robes, nor comnut any such 
breach of good taste; and to write letters without 
affectation, like his own letter written to my mother 
from Sinuessa ; to shew oneself ready to be reconciled 
to these who have lost their temper and trespassed 
against one, and ready to meet them halfway as soon 
as ever they seem to be willing to retrace their steps!; 
to read with minute care and not to be content with 
a superficial bird’s-eye view ; nor to be too quick in 
agreeing with every voluble talker; and to make the 
acquaintance of the Memous of Epictetus, which he 
supplied me with out of his own libre ALY 

ὃ. From Apo.ionius,* self-reliance and an unequi- 
vocal determination not to leave anything to chance ; 
and to look to nothing else even for a moment save 
Reason alone; and to remain ever the same, in the 
throes of pain, on the loss of a child,® during a linger- 
ing illness; and to see plainly from a living example 
that one and the same man can be very vehement 
and yel gentle: not to be impatient in instructing 
others; and to see in him a man who obviously 
counted as the least among his gifts his practical 
experience and faglty in imparting philosophic 
truths; and to learn in accepting seeming favours 
from friends * not to give up our independence for 
such things nor take them callously as a matter of 
course. 

9. From Sextus,° kindliness, and the example of a 


Verus, aged 7, at Praeneste in 169 (Capit. xxi. 3), and on the 
death of lis first-bornson T Aelus Antoninus soon after birth 
m 147. (Corp. Inscrip Graee Boeckh 3176.) ey. Dio 71.34, §5 
4 en, Fronto, ad dppian (Nab. Ὁ. 246). 
ὅ Capit. in. 1. He was, of Chaeronea and grandson of 
Plutarch. ep, Suidas sub voce: ‘He was held πὶ such 
honour by the kmperor as to act as his aysessor on the bench.” 


7 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Sevyua τοῦ οἴκου TOD πατρονομουμενου: καὶ τὴν 
ἔννοιαν τοῦ κατὰ φύσιν ζῆν καὶ τὸ σεμνὸν 
ἀπλάστως: καὶ τὸ στοχαστικὸν τῶν φίλων 
κηδεμονικῶς" καὶ τὸ ἀνεκτικὸι τῶν ἰδιωτῶν καὶ 
+76 ἀθεώρητον οἰομένων.ἢ 

Kat τὸ πρὸς TAVTAS εὐώρμοστον, ὥστε κολακ- 
εἴας μὲν πάσης προσηνεστέρα» εἶναι "τὴν 
ὁμιλίαν αὐτοῦ, αἰδεσιμώτατον δὲ αὐτοῖς ἐκείνοις 
Tap αὐτὸν ἐκεῖνον τὸν καιρὸν εἶναι: καὶ τὸ κατα- 
ληπτικῶς καὶ ὁδῷ ἐξευρετικὺὸν τε καὶ τακτικὸν 
τῶν εἰς βίον ἀναγκαίων δογμάτων. 

Καὶ τὸ μηδὲ ἔμφασίι ποτε ὀργῆς ἢ ἄλλου τινὸς 

πάθους παρασχεῖν, ἀλλὰ ἅμα μὲν ἀπαθέστατον 
εἶναι, ἅμα δὲ φιλοστοργότατον" καὶ τὸ εὔφημον 
καὶ τοῦτο ἀψοφητί: καὶ τὸ πολυμαθὲς ἀνεπι- 
φώντως. 
ι(. Παρὰ ’ Λλεξάνδρου τοῦ γρωμματικοῦ, τὸ 
ἀνεπίπληκτον" καὶ τὸ μὴ ὀνειδιστικῶς ἐπιλαμβάν- 
εσθωι τῶν βάρβαρον ἢ σόλοικόν τι ἢ ἁπηχὲς 
προενεγκαμένων, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιδεξίως αὐτὸ “μόνον ἐκεῖνο, 
ὃ ἔδει εἰρῆσθαι, προφέρεσθαι, ἐν τρόπῳ ἀποκρίσ- 
εῶς ἢ συνεπιμαρτυρήσεως ἢ συνδιαληψέεως περὶ 
αὐτοῦ τοῦ πρώγματος, οὐχὶ περὶ τοῦ ῥήματος, 
ἢ δι᾽ ἑτέρας τινὸς τοιαύτης ἐμμελοῦς παρυπο- 
μνήσεως. 

ια΄. apa Φρόντωνος, τὸ ἐπιστῆσαι, οἵα ἢ 
τυραννικὴ βασκανία καὶ ποικιλία καὶ ὑπόκρισις, 
καὶ ὅτι ὡς ἐπίπαν οἱ καλούμενοι οὗτοι παρ᾽ 
ἡμῖν εὐπατρίδαι ἀστοργότεροί πως εἰσίν. 


renee a 


L Of Cotiaeum, see Aristiles, Oraé. χὰ 142 tf (Jebb’s Jid.), 
He lived toagreat ave He wasin Romeain [4 (see ἡ ηεἰ, § 129) 
and resided at the palace (ὃδ 148, 154). See above on 1 5. 


ὃ 





BOOK I 


household patriarchally governed ; and the conception 
of life in accordance with Nature; and dignity 
without affectation; and an intuitive consideration 
for friends; and a toleration of the unlearned and 
the unreasoning. : 

And his tactful treatment of all his friends, so 
that simply to be with him was more delightful 
than any flattery, while at the same time those who 
enjoyed this privilege looked up to him with the 
utmost reverence; and the grasp and method 
which he shewed in discovering and marshalline 
the essential axioms of life. 

And never to exhibit any symptom of anger or any 
other passion, but to be at the same time utterly 
impervious to all passions and full of natural affection ; 
and to praise without noisy obtrusiveness, and to 
possess great learning but make no parade of 1%. 

10. From ALExanper tik GraMMakiin,? not to be 
captious ; nor in a carping spirit find fault with those 
who unport into thei conversation any expression 
which is barbarous or ungramunatical or muspro- 
nounced, but tactfully to bring in the very expression, 
that ought to have been used, by way of answer, or 
as it were in joint support of the assertion, or as a 
jot consideration of the thing itself and not of the 
language, or by some such graceful reminder. 

11. From Fronto, to note the envy, the subtlety, 
and. the dissimulation which are habitual to a tyrant ; 
and that, as a general rule, those amongst us who 
rank as patricians are somewhat wanting In natural 
affection. - 

“See Fronto, a? Ver. i. 7 (Naber, p. 185; ep. Ὁ 231) 
Marcus acknowledges greater debts to Fronto elsewhere, 
eg ad (εν πὶ iv, Perum dicere cx te disco. de re prosiin 


dis homunibusque ardue, 
9 


-' 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ue Παρὰ ᾿ Δλεξάνδρου τοῦ ΤΠ ϊλατωνικοῦ, τὸ 
pen πολλάκις μηδὲ χωρὶς ἀνάγκης λέγειν πρός 
τινα ἢ ἐν ἐπιστολῇ γράφειν, ὅτι ἄσχολός εἰμι" 
μηδὲ διὰ τούτου τοῦ τρόπου συνεχῶς παραιτ- 
εἶσθαι τὰ κατὰ τὰς πρὸς τοὺς συμβιοῦντας 
σχέσεις καθήκοντα προβαλλόμενον τὰ Tept- 
εστῶτα πράγματα. 

by’. Παρὰ ἱκατούλον, To μὴ ὀλιγώρως ὄχειν 
φίλου αἰτιωμένου τῆν ὧν τύχῃ ἀλόγως αἰτιώ- 
μενος, ἀλλὰ πειρᾶσθαι Kat! ἀποκαθιστέάναι ἐπὶ τὸ 
σύνηθες" καὶ τὸ περὶ τῶν διδασκάλων ἐκθύμως 
εὔφημον, οἷα τὰ περὶ Δομετίου * καὶ ᾿Αθηνοδότου 
ἀπομνημονευόμενα'" καὶ τὸ περὶ τὰ τέκνα ἀληθ- 
νῶς ἀγαπητικόν. 

ιδ΄, Παρὰ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ μου Yeovijpou, τὸ φιλοίκ- 
εἰον καὶ φιλάληθες καὶ φιλοδίκαιον: καὶ τὸ δι 
αὐτὸν γνῶναι Θρασέαν, Ιυλβίέδιον, Κάτωνα, 
Δίωνα, Βροῦτον" καὶ φαντασίαν λαβεῖν πολιτείας 
ἰσονόμου, κατ᾽ ἰσότητα καὶ ἰσηγορίαν OLOIKOU- 
μένης, καὶ βασιλείας τιμώσης πάντων μάλιστα 
τὴν ἐλευθερίαν τῶν ἀρχομένων' καὶ ἔτι παρὰ τοῦ 
αὐτοῦ τὸ ὁμαλὲς ὃ καὶ ὁμότονον ἐν τῇ τιμῇ τῆς 
φιλοσοφίας" καὶ τὸ εὐποιητικὸν, καὶ τὸ εὐμετώ- 
δοτον € ἐκτενῶς, καὶ τὸ εὔελπι, καὶ τὸ πιστευτικὸν 
περὶ τοῦ ὑπὸ τῶν φίλων φιλεῖσθαι: καὶ τὸ ἀν- 
επίκρυπτον πρὸς τοὺς καταγνώσεως UT αὐτοῦ 
τυγχάνοντας" καὶ τὸ μὴ δεῖσθαι στοχασμοῦ τοὺς 
φίλους αὐτοῦ περὶ τοῦ, τί θέλει ἢ τί οὐ θέλει, 
ἀλλὰ δῆλον εἶναι. 


1 This seems at first sight like our maccemate “try and,’ 
but καὶ must nean ere. 

2 Δομητίου PAD. For Δομετίου «9. WWerodian i, 3, § 4: 
ClG 4154, ete. * ὀμελὲς PAD: ὁμαλὲς Cor, 
τῷ 


BOOK I 


12. From ALEXANDER THE PLaTonist,! net to say to 
anyone often or without necessity, nor write in a 
letter, J am too busy, norin this fashion constantly 
plead urgent affairs as an excuse for evading the 
obligations entailed upon us by our relations towards 
those around us. 

13. From Caruus,? not to disregard a friend’s ex- 
postulation even when it is unreasonable, but toe try 
to bring him back to his usual friendliness ; and to 
speak with whole-hearted good-will of one’s teachers, 
as it is recorded that Donnutius? did of Athcnodotus ; 
and to be genumely fond of one’s children 

11, From my § Broruer’ Severus, love of family, 
love of truth, love of justice, and (thanks to him !) to 
know Thrasea, Helvidius, Cato, Dion, Brutus ; and the 
conception of a state with one law for all, based upon 
individual equality and freedom of speech, and of a 
sovranty which prizes above all things the liberty of 
the subject ; and furthermore from him also to set a 
well-balanced and unvarying value on philosophy ; 
and readiness to do others a kindness, aud eager 
generosity, and optimism, and confidence in the 
love of friends; and perfect openness in the case 
of those that came in for his censure; and the 
absence of any need for his friends to surmise 
what he did or did not wish, so plain was it. 


1 See Phil. Vil Soph. τι. 5, p.247 Kays. He was summoned by 
Marcus to Pannonia about 174 and made his Gieek secretary. 
* A Sto, see Capit. in. 2 
ὁ Ponutu were among the maternal ancestors of Mareus, 
and an Athenodotus was Fronto’s teacher (ed Cacs. iv. 12; 
Nab p. 73) 
+ See Index IL. Ife war father of the son-in-law of Marcus. 
Ti 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ιε΄. Παρὰ λΙαξίμου, τὸ κρατεῖν ἑαυτοῦ καὶ 
κατὰ μηδὲν περίφορον εἶναι" καὶ τὸ εὔθυμον ἔ ἔν τε 
ταῖς ἄλλαις περιστάσεσι καὶ ἐν ταῖς νόσοις" καὶ 
τὸ εὔκρατον τοῦ ἤθους καὶ μειλίχιον καὶ γεραρόν' 
καὶ τὸ οὐ σχετλίως κατεργαστικὸν τῶν προ- 
κειμένων. 

Kal τὸ πάντας αὐτῷ πιστεύειν, περὶ ὧν λέγοι, 
ὅτε οὕτως φρονεῖ, καὶ περὶ ὧν πράττοι, ὅτι 
οὐ κακῶς πράττει. καὶ τὸ ἀθαύμαστον καὶ ἀν- 
έκπληκτον, καὶ μηδαμοῦ ἐπειγόμενον ἢ ὀκνοῦν ἢ 
ὠμηχανοῦν ἢ κατηφὲς ἢ προσεσηρός, ἢ πάλιν 
θυμούμενον ἢ ἢ ὑφορώμενον. 

Καὶ τὸ εὐεργετικὸν καὶ τὸ συγγνωμονικὸν 
καὶ τὸ ὠψευδές: καὶ τὸ ἀδιαστρόφου μᾶλλον. ἢ 
διορθουμένου φαντασίαν πωρέχειν" καὶ ὅτι οὔτε 
ὠήθη ἄν ποτέ τις ὑπερορᾶσθαι ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, οὔτε 
ὑπέμεινεν ἂν κρείττονα αὐτοῦ αὑτὸν ὑπολαβεῖν" 
καὶ τὸ εὐχαριεντίζεσθαι. 1" 

ἐξ [Γαρὰ τοῦ πατρός, τὸ ἥμερον, καὶ μενετεκὸν 
ἀσαλεύτως ἐπὶ τῶν ἐξητασμένως κριθέντων" καὶ 
τὸ ἀκενόδοξον περὶ TAS δοκούσας τιμάς" καὶ το 
φιλόπονον καὶ ἐνδελεχές" καὶ τὸ ἀκουστικὸν τῶν 
ἐχόντων τὶ κοιψωφελὲς εἰσφέρειν' καὶ τὸ ἁπαᾶρα- 
τρέπτως Lees τὸ κατ᾽ ἀξίαν ἀπονεμητικὸν 
ἑκάστῳ" καὶ τὸ ἔμπειρον, ποῦ μὲν χρεία ἐντώσεως, 
ποῦ δὲ ἀνέσεως" καὶ τὸ παῦσαι τὰ περὶ τοὺς 
ἔρωτας τῶν μειρακίων. 


1 εὖ χαριεντίζεσθαι Menag.: εὔχαρι ἐν ταῖς ὁμιλίαις Leop 
"» 9% 


ee evr... . ζεσθαι Schenk! “ ἀεὶ τοῦ Scheoukl. 


ARE Ne ha, item jee Rath 


16,895 vni. 35, See Capit iu. 2; Pndes FY. 
1 haven raised a mle LO aes σ, a new deity. See 


12 


BOOK | 


ἰῦ, From Maximus,! self-mastery and stability of 
purpose; and cheeriness in sickuess as well as in 
all other circumstances ; and a character justly 
proportioned of sweetness and gravity; and to pertorm 
without grumbling the task that lies to one’s hand. 

And the confidence of every one in him that what 
he said was also what he thought, and that what he 
did was done with no ill intent. And not to shew 
surprise, and not to be daunted ; never to be hurried, 
or hold back, or be at a loss, or downecast, or smile ἃ 
foreed smile, or, again, be ill-tempered or suspicious 

Aud beneficence? and placability and veracity ; and 
to give the impression of a man who cannot deviate 
from the right way rather than of one who is kept 
in it?; a that no one could have thought himself 
looked down upon by him, or could go so far as to 
imagine himself a better man than he; and to keep 
pleasantry within due bounds. 

16 From my Fatser,* mildness, and an unshak- 
able adherence to ἰδὲ, ἴδε deliberately come to; 
and no empty vanity in respect to so-called honours ; 
and a love of work and thoroughness ; and a readiness 
to hear any suggestions for the common good: and 
an inflexible determination to give every man his 
due; and to know by experience when is the time 
to insist and when to desist; and to suppress all 
passion for boys.° 


* Here Pius, his adoptive father, is meant, not as above 
(i. 2) his father Verus. For a first sketch of this eulogy of 
Pius see below vi. 30 

5 It is not quite clear whether this means that Pius had 
put away this vice from himself or others, but the active verb 
seems rather to favour the latter view. Capit. Vel. Pau. 1, 
calls him clarus moribus (cp. also Aur. Vict. de Caes. xv.), but 
Julian says he was σώφρων od τὰ és ᾿Αφροδίτην 


2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


, \ δ ΄ Ν \ \ 2, a θ κι 
Kat ἡ κοινουοημοσύνη, καὶ τὸ ἐφεῖσθαι τοῖς 
as ἴων , fas’ f 
φίλοις μήτε συνδειπνεῖν αὐτῷ πάντως μήτε 
Fa) ‘ ὍΝ ef 
συναποδημεῖν ἐπάνώγκες" ἀεὶ O€ ὅμοιον αὐτὸν 
7 ς Ν “ \ 7 \ 
καταλαμβάνεσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν διὰ γρείας τινὰς 
Σ ΄ \ Ν Ν 3 "Ὁ πὶ a] 
ὠπολειφθέντων: καὶ τὸ ξητητικὸν ὠκριβῶς ἐν 
“ Ν f b] % f 
τοῖς συμβουλίοις, καὶ ἐπίμονον, ἀλλ᾿ + οὔτοιϊ 
/ ΜᾺ 3 7 ’ Ν ἴω 
προωπέστη ἡ τῆς ἐρεύνης ἀρκεσθεὶς ταῖς προ- 
/ Ν Ν \ fa) 
χείροις φαντασίαις" καὶ τὸ διατηρητικὸν τῶν 
7 Ν “Ὰ e / \ b) 7ὔ 
φίλων καὶ μηδαμοῦ ἁψίκορον μηδὲ ἐπιμανίς' 
Ἀ / / \ \ ins , \ 
καὶ TO αὔταρκες ἐν TAVTL, καὶ TO φαιδρόν' καὶ TO 
7] Ν Tan) , 
πόρρωθεν προνοητικόν, καὶ τῶν ἐλαχίστων προ- 
S \ 
SLOLKNTLKOV ἀτρωγῴώδως. 
= \ \ \ + Τῷ \ ἊἪ / 
Nat τὸ Tas ἐπιβοήσεις καὶ πᾶσαν κολακείαν 
᾽ ? a “ \ Ν Ν “ 
ἐπ αὐτοῦ σταλῆναι: καὶ TO φυλακτικὸν ἀεὶ TOY 
ἀναγκαίων τῇ ἀρχῇ, καὶ ταμιευτικὸν τῆς χορηγ- 
\ \ ΩΝ Ν “ 
ίας, καὶ ὑπομενετικὸν τῆς ἐπὶ τῶν τοιαύτων 
a \ \ / 
τινῶν KATALTLUTEWS' καὶ TO μήτε περὶ θεοὺς 
/ \ s 
δεισίδαιμον, μήτε περὶ ἀνθρώπους δημοκοπικὸν 
Xx 3 Ν ἊΝ 3 / 3 \ lan ? 
ἢ GPETKEVTLKOY ἢ OKXAOKXAPES, AANA νῆφον ἐν 
ΜᾺ \ f \ Ἂν ω ΄ 
πᾶσι, καὶ βέβαιον, καὶ μηδαμοῦ ἀπειρόκαλον 
“ 
μηδὲ καινοτόμον. 
rN \ an ? > ΄ 7) 7 , 
Kat τὸ τοῖς εἰς εὐμάρειαν βίου φέρουσί τι, 
e (4 7 “ », Ν y ΄ 
ὧν ἡ τύχη παρέχει δαψίλειαν, χρηστικὸν ἀτύφως 
/ \ 3 / , 
ἅμα καὶ ὠπροφασίστως, ὥστε παρόντων μὲν 
΄ 4 7 “ἊἊ 
ἀνεπιτηδεύτως ἅπτεσθαι, ἀπόντων δὲ μὴ δεῖσθαι" 
Ν N \ , Νὰ e/ 
καὶ TO μηδὲ ἄν τινα εἰπεῖν μήτε ὅτι σοφιστής, 
/ c/ 3 ‘ tt 
μήτε CTL οὐερνάκλος μήτε ὅτι σχολαστικός, 
3 5" ef \ / / 3 f 
ἄλλ, OTL ἀνὴρ πέπειρος, τέλειος, ἀκολάκευτος, 


1 οὐ τὸ PA: otro: Stich: ὅτι od Gat. ; οὕποτε Cor. 


14 


BOOK I! 


And his public spirit, and his not requiring his 
friends at all to sup with him or necessarily attend 
him abroad,} and their always finding him the 
same when any urgent aftairs had kept them 
away; and the spirit of thorough investigation 
which he shewed in the meetings of his Council, 
and his perseverance; nay his never desisting 
prematurely from an enquiry on the strength of 
off-hand impressions; and his faculty for keeping 
his friends and never being bored with them or 
infatuated about them; and Ins self-reliance in 
every emergency, and Ins good humour; and_ his 
habit of looking ahead and making provision for the 
smallest details without any heroics. 

And his restricting in his reign public acclamations 
and every sort of adulation; and his unsleeping 
attention to the needs of the empire, and his wise 
stewardship of its resources, and his patient tolerance 
of the censure that all this entailed; and his freedom 
from superstition with respect to the Gods and from 
hunting for popularity with respect to men by 
pandering to their desires or by courting the 
mob: yea his soberness in all things? and stedfast- 
ness ; and the absence in him of all vulgar tastes and 
any craze for novelty. 

And the example that he gave of utilizing without 
pride, and at the same without any apology, all the 
lavish gifts of Fortune that contribute towards the 
comfort of life, so as to enjoy them when present as 
a matter of course, and, when absent, not to miss 
them: and no one could charge him with sophistry, 
flippancy,® or pedantry; but he was a man mature, 

1 ep. Fronto, ad Caes πὶ. 20; v. 44. 

“ep. St Paul, Tun. τι 4. 5 
lit. that he was a ““ home-bred slave,” 2,6. umpudent. 


Ὁ 
ι 
ὦ 


1 


en 


( 


Nes 


“1 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


προεστάναι δυνείμενος, καὶ τῶν ἑαυτοῦ καὶ 
ἄλλων. 

Πρὸς τούτοις δὲ καὶ τὸ τιμητεκὸν τῶν ἀληθῶς 
φιλοσοφούντων, τοῖς δὲ ἄλλοις οὐκ ἐξονειδιστ- 
ἐκὸν οὐδὲ μὴν εὐπαράγωγον ὑπ αὐτῶν: ἔτι 
δὲ τὸ εὐόμιλον καὶ εὔχαρι οὐ κατακόρως: καὶ 
τὸ τοῦ ἰδίου σώματος ἐπιμελητικὸν ἐμμέτρως, 
οὔτε ws ἄν τις φιλόζωος οὔτε πρὸς καλλωπ- 
ἐσμὸν οὔτε μὴν ὀλιγώρως, ἀλλ᾽ ὥστε διὰ 
τὴν ἰδίαν προσοχὴν εἰς ὀλίγιστα ἰατρικῆς χρῃΐζ- 
ELV ἢ φαρμώκων καὶ ἐπιθεμάτων ἐ ἐκτός. 

Μάώλιστα δὲ τὸ παραχωρητικὸν ἀβασκάνως τοῖς 
δύναμίν τινα “κεκτημένοις, οἷον τὴν φραστικὴν ἢ ἢ 
τὴν ἐξ ἱστορίας νόμων ἢ ἐθῶν ἢ ἄλλων τινῶν 
πραγμάτων' ' καὶ ᾿συσπουδαστικὸν αὐτοῖς, ἵνα 
ἕκαστοι κατὰ τὰ ἴδια προτερήματα εὐδοκιμῶσε: 
πάντα δὲ κατὰ τὰ πάτρια πράσσων, οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸ 
τοῦτο ἐπιτηδεύων φαίνεσθαι, τὸ τὰ πάτρια 
φυλάσσειν. 

Ure δὲ τὸ μὴ εὐμετακίνητον καὶ ῥέπταστ- 
ἐκόν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τόποις, καὶ πράγμασι τοῖς 
αὐτοῖς ἐνδιατριπτικόν' καὶ τὸ μετὰ τοὺς παρ- 
οξυσμοὺς τῆς κεφαλαλγίας νεαρὸν εὐθὺς καὶ 
ἀκμαῖον πρὸς τὰ συνήθη ἔργα" καὶ τὸ μὴ εἶναι 
αὐτῷ πολλὰ τὰ ἀπόρρητα, ἀλλὰ ὀλίγιστα καὶ 
σπανιώτατα, καὶ ταῦτα ὑπὲρ τῶν κοινῶν μόνον" 
καὶ τὸ ἔμφρον καὶ μεμετρημένον ἔν τε θεωριῶν 
ἐπιτελέσει καὶ ἔργων. κατασκευαῖς καὶ “διανομαῖς 
καὶ τοῖς τοιούτοις, <a> ἀνθρώπου 1 πρὸς αὐτὸ τὸ 


1 ἀνθρώποις PAD: ἃ ἀνθρώπου Schenkl. 


“3 


1 Julian calls Marcus τετράγωνοΞε---" ὦ man foursquare. 
16 


BOOK 1 


complete,! deaf to flattery, able to preside over his 
own affairs and those of others. 

Besides this also was his high appreciation of all 
true philosophers without any upbraiding of the 
others, and at the same time without any undue 
subservience to them; then again his easiness of 
aecess and his graciousness that yet had nothing 
fulsome about it; and his reasonable attention to his 
bodily requirements, not as one too fund of life, 
or vain of his outward appearance,’ nor yet as one 
who neglected it, but so as by his own carefulness 
to need but very seldom the skill of the leech or 
inedicines and outward applications. 

But most of all a readiness to acknowledge with- 
vut jealousy the claims of those who were endowed 
with any especial gift, such as eloquence or know- 
ledge of law or ethics or any other subject, and to 
give them active support, that each might gain 
the honour to which lus individual eminence entitled 
him; and Ins loyalty to constitutional precedent 
without any parade of the fact that it was according 
to precedent. 

Furthermore lie was not prone to change or 
vacillation, but attached to the same places and the 
same things; and after his spasms of violent head- 
ache he would come back at once to his usual em- 
ployments with renewed vigour; and his secrets 
were not many but very few and at very rare intervals, 
and then only political secrets; and he shewed 
good sense and moderation in his management of 
public spectacles, and in the construction of public 
works, and in congiaria 5. and the hke, as a man who 

2 Capit. (Vid Pr xi. 1) says he wore stays to keep himself 
upright m old age. 

Shit. “fdistriburons.” ep. Capit. Vet. Paiv. 9, vin. 11, 


17] 
c 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


δέον πραχθῆναι δεδορκότος, οὐ πρὸς τὴν ἐπὶ τοῖς 
πραχθεῖσιν εὐδοξίαν. 

Οὐκ [ev] ἀωρὶ λούστης, οὐχὶ φιλοικοδόμος, 
οὐ περὶ τὰς ἐδωδὰς ἐπινοητής, οὐ περὶ ἐσθήτων 
ὑφὰς καὶ χρόας, οὐ περὶ σωμάτων ὥρας. Τὴ ἡ ὠπὸ 
Λωρίου στολὴ ἀνάγουσα ἀπὸ τῆς κάτω ἐπαύλεως, 
καὶ τῶν ἐν Δανουβίῳ τὰ πολλά. τῷ τελώνῃ 
ἐν Τούσκλοις παραιτουμένῳ ὡς ἐχρήσατο, καὶ 
πᾶς ὁ τοιοῦτος τρόπος. 

Οὐδὲν ἀπηνὲς οὐδὲ μὴν ἀδυσώπητον οὐδὲ 
λάβρον οὐδὲ ὡς ἄν τινω εἰπεῖν ποτε “ἕως 
ἱδρῶτος" ἀλλὰ πάντα διειλημμένα λελογίσθαι, 
ὡς ἐπὶ σχολῆς, ἀταράχως, τεταγμένως, ἐρρω- 
μένως, συμφώνως ἑαυτοῖς. ἐφαρμόσειε δ᾽ ἂν 
αὐτῷ τὸ περὶ τοῦ “Σωκράτους μφψημονευόμενον, 
ὅτι καὶ ἀπέχεσθαι καὶ ἀπολαύειν ἐδύνωτο τούτων, 
ὧν πολλοὶ πρός τε τὰς ἀποχὰς ἀσθενῶς καὶ 
πρὸς τὰς ἀπολαύσεις ἐνδοτικῶς ἔχουσιν. τὸ δὲ 
ἰσχύειν καὶ ἐπικαρτερεῖν 1 καὶ ἐννήφειν ἑκατέρῳ 
ἀνδρός ἐστιν ἄρτιον καὶ ἀήττητον ψυχὴν ἔχοντος, 
οἷον ἐν τῇ νόσῳ τῇ Μαξίμου. 

ee Tapa τῶν θεῶν, TO ἀγαθοὺς πάππους, 
ἀγαθοὺς γονέας, ἀγαθὴν ἀδελφήν, ἀγαθοὺς δὲ- 
δασκάλους, ἀγαθοὺς οἰκείους, συγγενεῖς, φίλους, 
σχεδὸν ἅ ἅπαντας ἔχειν" καὶ ὅτι περὶ οὐδένα αὐτῶν 
προέπεσον πλημμελῆσαί τι καίτοι διάθεσιν ἔχων 
τοιαύτην, ἀφ᾽ ἧς, εἰ ἔτυχε, κἂν ἔπραξά τι τοιοῦτο: 


1 ἔτι καρτερεῖν PA: ἐπικαρτερεῖν Cas. 





1 Xen sem. 1.3,$15 πολλοὶ would herve seem = οὗ πολλοί. 

* The Greek may also mean ‘To be strong and to persist 
without excess in each case is characteristic, "and ἑκατέρῳ 
suits this better. 


18 


BOOK I 


hud an eye tu what had to be done and not to the 
credit to be gained thereby. 

{Ὸ did not bathe abt all hours; he did not build 
for the love of building ; he gave no thought to his 
food, or to the texture and colour of his clothes, or 
the comeliness of his slaves. His robe came up from 
Lorium, his country-seat in the plains, and Lanuvium 
supplied his wants for the most part. Think of how 
he dealt with the customs’ officer at Tusculum when 
the latter apologized, and it was a type of his usual 
conduct. 

There was nothing rude in him, nor yet over- 
bearing or violent nor carried, as the phrase goes, 
“to the sweating state’’; but everything was con- 
sidered separately, as by a man of ample leisure, 
calmly, methodically, manfully, consistently. One 
might apply to him what is told of Socrates, that 
he was able to abstain from or enjoy those things 
that many are not strong envugh to refrain from 
and too inuch inchned to enjoy. But to have 
the strength to persist im the one case and be ab- 
stemivus in the other? is characteristic of a man who 
has a pertect and indomitable soul, as was seen in the 
illness of Maximus. 

17, From vue Gops, to have good grandfathers,? 
good parents, ἃ good sister, good teachers, good 
companions, kinsmen, friends—nearly all of them ; 
and that [ fell into no trespass against any of them, 
and yet 1 had a disposition that way inclined, such as 
might have led me into something of the sort,* had 


δὴ M. Annins Verus, three times consul (Dio 69. 21, 
Sl)and praef. urbi (Capit. 1 2), who died 138, and P. Cal- 
3 


visius Tullus, cons. δα, 109, See Capit.i 3; Fronto, ad 
Caes. πὶ 2. tep 1.17, δ: αι. 18, § 4. 


19 


MARCUS AORELIUS 
τῶν θεῶν δὲ εὐποιία τὸ μηδεμίων συνδρομὴν 
πραγμάτων γενέσθαι, ἥτις ἔμεχλί μὲ λέγξειν. 

Καὶ τὸ μὴ ἐπὶ πλέον Thad ἣναι Tapa τῇ πωλλακῇ 
τοῦ πάππου" καὶ τὸ τὴν ὥραν διασῶσαι" καὶ τὸ 
μὴ πρὸ ὥρας ἀνδρωθῆναι, ἀλλ᾿ ἔτι καὶ ἐπιλαβεῖν 
τοῦ χρόνου. 

Τὸ ὁ ἄρχοντι καὶ πατρὶ ὑποταχθῆναι, ὃ Os ἔμελλε 
πάντα τὸν τῦφον ἀφαιρήσειν μου, καὶ εἰς ἔννοιαν 
ἄξειν τοῦ ὅτι δυνωτὸν ἐστι» ἐν αὐλῇ Θιοῦντα 
[LTE δορυφορήσεων x pn Seer μήτε ἐσθήτων 
σημειωδῶν μήτε λαμπάδων καὶ ἀνδριώντων 
[τοιῶνδὲ τινων] καὶ τοῦ ὁμοίου κόμπου" ἀλλ᾽ 
ἔξεστιν ἐγγυτάτω ἰδιώτου συστέλλειν ἑαυτόν, καὶ 
μὴ διὰ τοῦτο ταπεινότερον ὴ ῥᾳθυμότερον ἔχειν 
πρὸς τὰ ὑπὲρ τῶν κοινῶν ἡγεμονικῶς πραχθῆναι 
δέοντα. 

To ἀδελφοῦ τοιούτου τυχεῖν δυναμένου μὲν 
διὰ ἤθους ἐπεγεῖραί με πρὸς ἐπιμέλειαν ἐμαυτοῦ, 
ἅμα δὲ καὶ τιμῇ καὶ στοργῇ εὐφραίνοντὸς με: 
τὸ παιδία μοι ἀφυῆ μὴ γενέσθαι μὴδε KOTO 
TO σωμάτιον διάστροφα: τὸ μὴ ἐπὶ πλέον με 
προκόψαι ἐν ῥητορικῇ καὶ ποιητεκῇ καὶ τοῖς 
ἄλλοις ἐπιτηδεύμασιν, ἐν οἷς ἰσως ἂν κατεσχέθην, 
εἰ ἡσθόμην ἐ ἐμαυτὸν εὐόδως προιόντα.. τὸ φθάσαι 
τοὺς τροφέας ἐν ἀξιώματι καταστῆσαι, οὗ δὴ 


Τρ. ax. 21. After his tather’s death Marcus was 
brought up at his grandfather's house (Capit 1 7) Capit. 
(v. 3) says he nugrated de mutemius ἤν ἐς much against his 
will to the impenal palace when adopted by Hadrian. It 
is possible but not likely that ‘grandfather ” here means 
Hadrian. 

Το Verus, whose character was more of a warning than 
an example, as Lucian Nagr. 19 calls Rome for its wickedness 


20 


BOOK I 


it so chanced: but by the grace of God there was no 
such coincidence of circumstances as was likely to 
put me to the test. 

And that Iwas not brought up any longer with 
my grandfather's! concubine. and that 1 kept 
unstained the flower of my youth ; and that 1 did not 
make tnial of my manhood before the due time, but 
even postponed it. 

That I was subordinated to a ruler and a father 
capable of ridding me of all conceit, and of bringing 
me to recognize that it is possible to live in a Court 
and yet do without body-guards and gorgeous 
garments and lnkmen and statues and the like 
pomp ; and that it is in such a man’s power to reduce 
himself very nearly to the condition of a private 
individual and yet not on this account to be more 
paltry or more remiss in dealing with what the 
interests of the slate require Lo be done in hnperial 
fashion 

That it was my lot to have such a brother,? capable 
by his character of stimulating me to w atchful care 
over myself, and at the same time delightmg me by 
his deference 8 and affection : that my children have 
not been devoid of intelligence nor physically 
deformed. That | oe not make more progress in 
rhetoric? and poetry? and my other studies, in which 
I should perhaps have been engrossed, had I felt 
myself making good way in them. That 1 lost 
no time mn promoting my tutors to such posts of 


γυμνάσιον ἀρετῆς, see Epict. πὶ. 20, § 11. Marcus seems to 
have been genuinely fond of him, see Fronto, ad | er. 11. 1; 
ad Caes. 1.17; andep Aristides, Pancy. in Uy § 425 (Jebb). 
~ Capit. Vit. Ver viit 5 $4.7 
* 1.7. cp. Fronto, ed Cues 1.8, ad Anis, 2 » (Nab p. 96) ; 
de log. 3 (Nab. p. 150). 


21 


7 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἐδόκουν μοι ἐπιθυμεῖν, καὶ μη ἀναβαλέσθαι ἐλπίδι 
τοῦ με, ἐπεὶ νέοι ἔτι ἧσαν, ὕστερον αὐτὸ πράξειν. 
τὸ γνῶναι ᾿Απολλώνιον, ᾿Ῥούστικον, Μάξιμον. 

Τὸ φαντασθῆναι περὶ τοῦ κατὰ φύσιν βίου 
ἐναργῶς καὶ πολλάκις, οἷός τίς ἐστι ὥστε, ὅσον 
ἐπὶ τοῖς θεοῖς καὶ ταῖς ἐκεῖθεν διαδόσεσι καὶ 
συλλήψεσι καὶ ἐπινοίαις, μηδὲν κωλύειν ἤδη 
κατὰ φύσιν ζῆν με, ἀπολείπεσθαι δὲ ἔτι τούτου 
παρὰ τὴν ἐμὴν αἰτίαν, καὶ παρὰ τὸ μὴ διατηρεῖν 
τὰς ἐκ τῶν θεῶν ὑπομνήσεις καὶ μονονουχὶ 
διδασκαλίας. 

Τὸ ἀντισχεῖν μοι τὸ σῶμα ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ἐν 
τοιούτῳ βίῳ" τὸ μήτε βενεδίκτης ἅψασθαι μήτε 
Θεοδότου, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὕστερον ἐν ἐρωτικοῖς πάθεσι 
γενόμενον ὑγιᾶναι' τὸ χαλεπήναντα πολλάκις 
Ῥουστίκ» μηδὲν πλέον πρᾶξαι, ἐφ᾽ ὡὰν μετ- 
ἔγνων" τὸ μέλλουσαν νέαν τελευτῶν τὴν τεκοῦσαν 
ὅμως οἰκῆσαι μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ τὰ τελευταῖα ἔτη. 

Τὸ ὁσάκις ἐβουλήθην ἐπικουρῆσαί τινι πενο- 
μένῳ ἢ εἰς ἄλλο τί χρήξοντι, μηδέποτε ἀκοῦσαί 
με, ὅτι οὐκ ἔστι μοι χρήματα, ὅθεν γενήται" καὶ 
τὸ αὐτῷ ἐμοὶ χρείαν ὁμοίαν, ὡς παρ᾽ ἑτέρου 
μεταλαβεῖν, μὴ συμπεσεῖν: τὸ τὴν γυναῖκα 
τοιαύτην εἶναι, οὑτωσὶ μὲν πειθήνιον, οὕτω δὲ 
φιλόστοργον, οὕτω δὲ ἀφελῆ): τὸ ἐπιτηδείων 
τροφέων εἰς τὰ παιδία εὐπορῆσαι. 


ι σοῦ μὴ PA: με Cas. 





leg. Rusticus, cons. αἰ. in 162, and yreef. urhis Pro- 
culus, see Capit. 11. 5. 

24 ἐ Dio 71. 36, § 3. 

1 Domitia Lucilla, dau. of P. Calvisius Tullus. She died 
in 156, aged about 50. For her sce above i 33 viii. 25; 


22 


BOOK I! 


honour! as they seemed to desire, and that I did not 
put them off with the hope that I would do this 
later on since they were still young. That I got to 
know Apollonius, Rusticus, Maximus. 

That I had clear and frequent conceptions as to 
the true meaning of a life according to Nature,’ so 
that as far as the Gods were concerned and their 
blessings and assistance and intention, there was 
nothing to prevent me from beginning at once to 
live in accordance with Nature, though I still come 
short of this ideal by my own fault, and by not 
attending to the reminders, nay, almost the instruc- 
tions, of the Gods. 

That my body holds out so long in such a life as 
mine ὃ: that I did not touch Benedicta or Theodotus, 
but that even afterwards, when I did give way to 
ainatory passions, | was cured of them; that, though 
often offended with Rustieus, | never went so far as 
to do anything for which I should have been sorry ; 
that my mother,* though she was to die young, yet 
spent her last years with me. 

That as often as J had the inclination to help any- 
one, who was in pecuniary distress or needing any 
other assistance, [ was never told that there was no 
money available for the purpose; and that I was 
never under any similar need of accepting help from 
another. That | have been blessed with a wife so 
docile,®> so affectionate, so unaffected ;® that I had no 
lack of suitable tutors for my children. 

Fronto, ad Cars. iv. 6; Capit. vi. 9. Her head appears on a 
coin of Nicaea in Bithynia. 5 ey. Fronto, ad Caes v. 11. 

’ en, Fronto, ad Pao 2, ad fn. for Pius’ opinion of his 

daughter. “The coutfure of the younger Faustina as seen on 


coins is much simpler than that of her mother. She was 
with Marcus in Pannonuia. for a time at least. 


23 


δὶ 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


To δι ὀνειράτων βοηθήματα δοθῆναι ἄλλα 
τε καὶ ὡς μὴ πτύειν αἷμα καὶ μὴ ἰλυγγιᾶν, καὶ 
τὸ τοῦ év! ἱκΚαιήτῃ Τ΄" ὥσπερ χρήσῃ" “+ 6arw@s τε 
ἐπεθύμησα φιλοσοφίας, μὴ ἐμπεσεῖν εἴς τινα σοφ- 
ιστήν, μηδὲ ἀποκαθίσαι ἐπὶ τοὺς συγγραφεῖς," 
ἢ συλλογισμοὺς ἀναλύειν, ἢ περὶ τὰ μετεωρο- 
λογικὰ καταγίνεσθαι. πάντα γὰρ ταῦτα “ θεῶν 


>» 


nm / - ? 
βοηθῶν καὶ τύχης δεῖταί «τινος!." 
» nw Γ / 
Ta ἐν Rovadoss πρὸς τῷ Vpavova. a’! 


! rotrou PA: τὸ τοῦ ἐν Καιήτῃ "" ἅσπερ χρήσῃ Lolit. 

* tous συγγραφεῖς Pui. τὺ συγγράφει! ἰνοισκο ἐπὶ τοῦ 
γρίφους (riddles) Schenk. 

ὁ Phave added τινὸς to complete the apparent senrtiius, 
the source of which 1s not known 

Ἐ Tt is not clear what this numeral (-= 1) represeuts. 





Lep Fronto, ad Cars an 9, and below, ix, 27. ae 
honsel€ became a dream-giver atter lus death, see Caprice, 


avin. 7. Dreams were iG recountsed tmethed ἽΝ which the 


BOOK IJ 


That by the agency of dreams! I was given 
antidotes both of other kinds and against the 
spitting of blood and vertigo; and there is that 
response also at Caleta, “ays thou shalt use at.’ And 
that, when I had set my heart on philosophy, I did 
not fall into the hands of a sophist, nor sat down 
at the author’s desk, or became a solver of syllogisius, 
nor busied myself with physical phenomena. For 
ul the above fhe Geds as helpers and good fortune 
need. 

ἢ γέρον among lhe Quad: on the Gran? 


(rod of healing comnimuineated his prescriptions, Behef in 
them was unmversal, aud shared by the atheist Pliny, the 
sceptic Lucian, Aristides the devotee, Galen the scientist, 
Dio the historian and man of afflaus. Lt is not unknown to 
Christians Yet there have been found writers to gird at 
Mareus for his ‘superstutious ” belref in dreams! 

ὁ These words may be mitended either to conclude the first 
book or, wore bkely, head the second Jn the former case, 
as Gataker points out, rede would have heen usual not τά. 


to 
ωι 


BIBATON B! 


a. ωθεν “προλέγειν ἑαυτῷ" συντεύξομαι περι- 
ἐργῷ, ἀχαρίστῳ, ὑβριστῇ, δολερῷ, βασκάνῳ, 
ἀκοινωνήτῳ. πάντα ταῦτα συμβέβηκει ἐκείνοις 
Tapa τὴν ἄγνοιαν τῶν ἀγαθῶν καὶ κακῶν. ἐγὼ 
δὲ τεθεωρηκὼς τὴν φύσιν τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, ὃ ὅτι καλόν, 
καὶ τοῦ κακοῦ, ὅτι αἰσχρόν, καὶ THT αὐτοῦ τοῦ 
ἁμαρτάνοντος “φύσιν, ὅτι μοι “συγγενής, οὐχὶ 
αἵματος ἢ σπέρματος τοῦ αὐτοῦ, ὠλλὰ νοῦ καὶ 
θείας ἀπομοίρας " μέτοχος, οὔτε βλαβῆναι ὑπὸ 
τινος αὐτῶν “δύναμαι: αἰσχρῷ yap με οὐδεὶς 
περιβαλεῖ: οὔτε ὀργίζεσθαι τῷ συγγενεῖ δύναμαι 
οὔτε ἀπέχθεσθαι αὐτῴ. γεγόναμεν γὰρ πρὸς 
συνεργίαν, ὡς πόδες, ὡς χεῖρες, ὡς βλέφαρα, ὡς 
οἱ στοῖχοι τῶν ἄνω καὶ κάτω ὀδόντων. τὸ οὗν 
ἀντιπράσσειν ἀλλήλοις 1 παρὰ φύσιν: ἀντίπρακτ- 
LKOV δὲ τὸ ἀγανακτεῖν καὶ ἀποστρέφεσθαι. 

come Ὅ τί ποτε τοῦτό εἰμι, σαρκία ἐστὶ καὶ 
πνευμάτιον καὶ τὸ ἡγεμονικόν. ἄφες τὰ βιβλία: 
μηκέτι σπῶ" οὐ δέδοται. ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἤδη ἀποθνήσκ- 
ov τῶν μὲν σαρκίων καταφρόνησον' λύθρος καὶ 
ὀστάρια καὶ κροκύφαντος, ἐκ νεύρων, φλεβίων, 
ἀρτηριῶν πλεγμάτιον. θέασαι δὲ καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα, 


1 «τοῦ αὐτοῦ Μάρκου" ἄντικρυς ἐπικτητίζει:» 1), 
3. ἀπόρροια (cp. ii. 4) ““ efflux from,” Corssen. 


26 


BOOK il 


1. Say to thyself at daybreak:! I shall come 
across the busy-body, the thankless, the bully, the 
treacherous, the envious, the unneighbourly.2 All 
this has befallen them because they know not good 
from evil. But [, in that I have comprehended the 
nature of the Good that it is beautiful, and the 
nature of Evil that it is ugly, and the nature of the 
wrong-doer himself that it is akin to me, not as 
partaker of the same blood and seed but of 
intelligence and a morsel of the Divine, can neither 
be injured by any of them—for no one can involve 
me in what is debasing—nor can Ibe wroth with my 
kinsman and hate him. for we have come into 
being for co-operation, as have the feet, the hands, 
the eyelids, the rows of upper and lower teeth. 
Therefore to thwart one another is against Nature 
and we do thwart one another by shewing resentment 
and aversion. 

This that I am, whatever it be, is inere flesh 
and a little breath and the ruling Reason. Away 
with thy books?! Be no longer drawn aside by 
them: it is not allowed. But as one already dymg 
disdain the flesh : it is naught but gore and bones and 
a network compact of nerves and veins and arteries. 
Look at the breath too, what sort of thing it is; air: 


*) 


τς Ts 2 cp Sen. de Zra iw 10. eh Bs 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ὁποῖόν τί ἐστιν' ἄνεμος: οὐδὲ ἀεὶ τὸ αὐτό, ἀλλὰ 
πώσης ὥρας ἐξεμούμενον καὶ πώλιν βοφούμενον. 
τρίτον οὖν ἐστὶ τὸ ἡγεμονικόν. @oe | ἐπενοήθητι" 
γέρων εἶ" μηκέτι τοῦτο ἐάσῃς δουλεῦσαι, μηκέτι 
καθ᾽ ὁ ὁρμὴν ἀκοινώνητον νευροσπαστηθῆναι, μηκέτι 
τὸ εἱμαρμένον ) παρὸν δυσχερᾶναι ἢ μέλλον 
ἀποδύρεσθαι." 

γ΄. Ta τῶν θεῶν προνοίας μεστώ, τὰ τῆς τύχης 
οὐκ ἄνευ φύσεως ἢ συγκλώσεως καὶ ἐπιπλοκῆς 
τῶν προνοίᾳ διοικουμένων. πάντα ἐκεῖθεν pee 
πρόσεστι δὲ τὸ ἀναγκαῖον, καὶ τὸ τῷ ὅλῳ κόσμῳ 
συμφέρον, ov μέρος εἰ, παντὶ δὲ φύσεως μέρει 
ἀγαθόν, ὃ φέρει ἡ τοῦ ὅλου φύσις, καὶ ὃ ἐκείνης 
ἐστὶ σωστικον. σώζουσι δὲ κόσμον, ὥσπερ αἱ 
τῶν στοιχείων, οὕτως καὶ αἱ τῶι συγκριμάτων 
μεταβολαί. ταῦτά σοι ἀρκείτω, εἰ δόγματά ἐ ἐστι." 
τὴν δὲ τῶν βιβλίων δύψαν ῥῆῖψον, ἵ va μὴ γογγύζων 
ἀποθάνῃς, ἀλλὰ ἵλεως, ἀληθῶς, καὶ ἀπὸ καρδίας 
εὐχάριστος τοῖς θεοῖς. 

ὃ. Μέμνησο, ἐκ πόσου ταῦτα ἀναβάλλῃ, καὶ 
ὁποσάκις προθεσμίας λαβὼν παρὰ τῶν θεῶι οὐ 
χρᾷ αὐταῖς. δεῖ δὲ ἤδη ποτὲ αἰσθέσθαι, τίνος 
κόσμου μέρος εἶ, καὶ τίνος διοικοῦντος τὸν κόσμον 

/ 
ὠπόρροια ὑπέστης: καὶ ὅτι ὄρος ἐστί σοι περίγε- 
γραμμένος τοῦ χρόνου, ᾧ ἐὰν εἰς τὸ ἀπαιθριάσαι 


1 ᾧ δὴ ADC: 81 Wilam.: ἀπονοήθητι PADC. 

3 ἀποδύεσθαι AD. ὑποδύεσθαι P: ἀποδύρεσθαι (ὑττοδύρ. Lofit) 
Rend. 

> εἰ δόγματά ἐστι AD: ἀεὶ -. ἔστω PC, 

Lem, αι. 63 1. 17, 8 6; Dio 71. 94. 8 4, Marcus would be 
a hitle over 50. Contrast 1, 17, § 6, and note. Cromwell 
when 51 wnting from Dunbar says, “1 grow an old man.” 


28 


BOOK 1] 


and not even that always the same, but every minute 
belched forth and again gulped down. Then, 
thirdly, there is the ruling Reason. Put thy thought 
thus: thou art an old man!; let this be a thrall no 
longer, no more a puppet? pulled aside by every 
selfish impulse ; nor let it grumble any longer at what 
is allotted to it in the present or dread it in the future. 

3. Full of Providence are the works of the Gods, 
nor are Fortune’s works independent of Nature or 
of the woven texture and mterlacement of all that is 
under the control of Providence Thence® are all 
things derived τς but Necessity too plays its part and 
the Welfare of the whele Umwverse of which thou art 
a portion, But good for every part of Nature is that 
which the Nature of the Whole brings about, and 
which goes to preserve it. Now it is the changes 
not only of the elements but of the things com- 
pounded of them that preserve the Universe. Let 
these reflections suffice thee, 1f thou hold them as 
principles. But away with thy thirst for books,’ that 
thou mayest die not murmuring but with a good 
grace, truly and from thy heart grateful to the Gods. 

4. Call to mind how long thou deterrest these 
things, and how many tumes thou hast received from 
the Gods grace” of the appointed day and thou usest 
it not. Yet now, if never before, shouldest thou 
realize of what Universe thou art a part, and as an 
emanation from what Controller of that Universe 
thou dost subsist; and that a limit has been set 
to thy time, which if thou use not to let daylight 


7 an. 163 vi. 16, 283 vu. 3,29; xn 19. ἐν. Clem. Alex. 


Strom τὰ. 33 iv. 1]. 4 v1 3635 x11. 26. 
+ Referred to’ by Arethas on Dio Chrys. Orat. 32. 15 as 
Ι “ ΕῚ . K a 
πάντα ἄνωθεν per. cp. St James, kp 1 17 sa eee 


® apobcoutu dit, ‘a time-linut for enfurcement of claims 
¥ a e 33 
after which they lapsed. 29 


MARCUS ATRELIUS 


μὴ χρήσῃ, οἰχήσεται, καὶ οἰχήσῃ, καὶ αὖθις οὐκ 
ἑξεσται. 

ε.. Πάσης ὥρας φρόντιζε στιθαρῶςν, ὡς Pap- 
εἷος καὶ ἄρρην, τὸ ἐν χερσὶ μετὰ τῆς ἀκριβοῦς 
καὶ ἀπλάστου σεμνότητος καὶ φιλοστοργίας καὶ 
ἐλευθερίας καὶ δικαιότητος πράσσειν" καὶ σγολὴν 
σαυτῷ ἀπὸ πασῶν τῶν ἄλλων φαντασιῶν 
πορίξειν. ποριεῖς δέ, ἂν ὡς ἐσχάτην τοῦ βίου 
ἑκάστην πρᾶξιν ἐνεργῇς ἀπηλλαγμένην, πάσης 
εἰκαιότητος καὶ ἐμπαθοῦς ἀποστροφῆς ἀπὸ τοῦ 
αἱροῦντος λόγου καὶ ὑποκρίσεως καὶ φιλαυτίας 
καὶ δυσαρεστήσεως πρὸς τὰ συμμεμοιραμένα. 
ὁρᾷς, πῶς ὀλίγα ἐστίν, ὧν κρατῆσας Τίς δύναται 
εὔρουν καὶ θεουδῆ βιῶσαι βίον' καὶ γὰρ ot 
θεοὶ πλέον οὐδὲν ὠπαιτήσουσι Tapa τοῦ ταῦτα 


φυλάσσοντος. 
t 


ς΄. Ὕβριξε, ὕβριξε " αὑτήν, ὦ ψυχή" τοῦ δὲ 
τιμῆσαι σεαυτὴν οὐκέτι καιρὸν ἕξεις’ εἷς 5 1 γὰρ 
ὁ βίος ἑκάστῳ οὗτος δέ σοι σχεδὸν διήνυσται 
μὴ αἰδουμένῃ σεαυτήν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ταῖς ἄλλων ψυχαῖς 
τιθεμένῃ τὴν σὺν εὐμοιρίαν. 

ζ. Τϊερισπᾷ τί σε τὰ “ἔξωθεν ἐμπίπτοντα ; 
καὶ σχολὴν πώρεχε σεαυτῷ τοῦ προσμανθάνειν 
ἀγαθόν τί, καὶ παῦσαι ῥεμβόμενος. ἤδη δὲ καὶ 
τὴν ἑτέραν περιφορὰν φυλακτέον. ληροῦσι yap 
καὶ διὰ πράξεων οἱ “κεκμηκότες τῷ βίῳ καὶ μὴ 
ὄχοντες σκοπόν, ἐφ᾽ ὅν πᾶσαν ὁρμὴν καὶ καθώπαξ 
φαντασίαν ἀπευθύνουσιν. 


l ἥξεται Ps Serra AD. 2 ὑβρί ar Gat. (ep. § 16). 
ὁ οὐ As εὖ Ps βραχὺς (cy. iv. 26) D: εἷς Boot. 


1 8il; vii 69; Sen. Hp. xii 2 SS 10. Τῦ: κι. ὃ 
20 


BOOK II 


unto thy soul, it will be gone—and thou !—and never 
agam shall the chance be ihme. 

Every hour inake up thy imind stardily as a 
ΠΣ and ἃ man to dv what thou hast in hand with 
scrupulous and unaffected dignity and love of thy kind 
and independence and justice; and to give thy self 
rest from all other impressions. And thou wilt give 
thyself this, if thou dost execute every act of thy 
life as though it were thy last, divesting thyself of 
all anunlessness* and all passionate antipathy to the 
convictions of reason, and all hypocrisy and self-love 
and dissatisfaction with thy allotted share. ‘Thou seest 
how few are the things, by inastering which a man 
may lead a life of tranquility and godhkeness; for 
the Gods also will ask no more from him who keeps 
these precepts. 

6. Wrong thyself? wrong thyself, O my Soul! 
But aa time for honouring thyself will have gone 
by ; for a inan has but one life, and this for thee is 
well- τ closed,! and yet thou dost not hold thyself 
in reverence, but settest thy well-being in the souls 
of others. 

Do those things draw thee at all away, which 
befall thee from without? Make then leisure for 
thyself for the learniag of some good thing more, and 
cease being carried aside hither and thither. But 
therewith must thou take heed of the other error. 
For they too are triflers, who by their activities have 
worn themselves out in life without even having 
an aim whereto they can direct every impulse, aye 
and even every thought. 


* Apparently a sarcastic apostrophe, which is not in 
Marcus’ usual manner. 


ed 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


γ΄. "Παρὰ μεν τὸ μὴ ὠἀρισ τάνειν, τί ἐν τῇ ἄλλου 
ψυχῇ γίνεται, οὐ ῥᾳδίως τις ὠφθὴ “κακοδαιμονῶν' 
τοὺς δὲ τοῖς τῆς ἰδίας ψυχῆς κινήμασι μὴ παρ- 
ico ub oCunas ἀνάγκη κακοδαιμονεῖν. 
ie Τούτων ἀεὶ δεῖ μεμνῆσθαι, τίς ἡ τῶν ὅλων 
φύσις, καὶ τίς 1) ἐμὴ, καὶ πῶς αὕτη πρὸς ἐκείνην 
ἔχουσα, καὶ ὑποῖόν "ἢ μέρος ὁ ὁποίου τοῦ ὅλου οὗσα' 
καὶ OTE οὐδεὶς ὁ ὁ κωλύων τὰ ἀκόλουθα τῇ φύσει, ἧς 
μέρος εἶ, πράσσειν 1 τε ἀεὶ καὶ λέγει". 

(. Φιλοσόφως ὁ Θεόφραστος, ἐν τῇ συγυρίσει 
τῶν ἁμαρτημάτων, ὡς ἄν τις κοινύτερον τὰ 
τοιαῦτα συγκρίνειε, φησὶ βαρύτερα εἰναι τῷ κατ᾽ 
ἐπιθυμίαν πλημμελούμενα τῶν κατὰ θυμόν. ὁ 
yap θυμούμενος μετά τινος λύπης καὶ λεληθυέας 
συστολῇ IIS φαίνεται τὸν λόγον ἀποστρεφόμενος" 0 
δὲ KAT ἐπιθυμίαν ἁμαρτάνων, ὑφ᾽ ἡδονῆς ἡττώ- 
μενος, ἀκολαστότερός πως φαίνεται καὶ θηλύ- 
TEpOS ἐν ταῖς ἁμαρτίαις. ὀρθῶς οὖν καὶ φιλοσοφ- 
ίας ἀξίως ἔφη, μείζονος ἐγκλήματος ἔχεσθαι τὸ 
μεθ᾽ ἡδονῆς ἁμαρτανόμενον ἤπερ τὸ μετὰ hums: 
ὅλως τε ὁ μὲν προηδικημένῳ μᾶχλον ἔοικε καὶ 
διὰ λύπης ἡνωγκασμένῳ θυμωθῆναι" 0 δὲ αὐτόθεν 
πρὸς τὸ ἀδικεῖν ὥρμηται, φερόμενος ἐπὶ τὸ πρᾶξαί 
τί κατ᾽ ἐπιθυμίαν. 

ια΄. Ὥς ἤδη δυνατοῦ ὄντος ἐξιέναι τοῦ βίου, 
οὕτως ἕκαστα ποιεῖν καὶ λέγει καὶ διανοεῖσθαι. 
τὸ δὲ ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἀπελθεῖν, εἰ μὲν θεοὶ εἰσίν, 


eae at meer meth erie ete nti my ery 





1 Here Marcus deviates from the strmet Store doctrine, 
which allowed no degrees 1 faults. 

2 For συστολὴ ep. Diog. Laert. (Zeno) 63, ἔλεος εἶναι πόθῳ" 
καὶ συστολὴν ἄλογον. 3 bore, ὃ 5. 


32 


BOOK II 


8. Not easily is a man found to be unhappy by 
reason of his not regarding what is gomg on in 
another man’s soul; but those who do not attend 
closely to the motions of their own souls must in- 
evitably be unhappy. 

9. This must always be borne in mind, what is the 
Nature of the whole Universe, and what mine, and 
how this stands in relation to that, being too what 
sort of a part of what sort of a whole; and that no 
one can prevent thee from doing and saying always 
what is in keeping with the Nature of which thou 
art a part. 

10. Theophrastus in lis comparison of wrong- 
doings—for, speaking in a somewhat popular way, 
such comparison may be made—says in the true 
philosophical spirit that the offences which are due 
to lust are more heinous than those which are duce to 
anger For the man who is moved with anger 
seems to turn his back upon reason with some pai 
and unconscious compunction?; but he that does 
wrong from lust, bemg mastered by pleasure, seems 
in some sort to be more incontinent and more un- 
manly in his wrong-doing. Rightly then, and not 
unworthily of a philosopher, he said that the wrong- 
doing which is allied with pleasure calls for a severer 
condemnation than that which is allied with pain; 
and, speaking generally, that the one wrong-doer is 
more like a man, who, being sinned against first, has 
been driven by pain to be angry, while the other, 
being led by lust to do some act, has of his own 
motion been impelled to do evil. 

11. Let thine every deed and word and thought 
be those of a man who can depart from life this 
moment.? But to go away from among men, if 

33 
υ 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


οὐδὲν δεινόν: κακῷ ψάρ σε οὐκ ἂν περιβάλοιεν" εἰ 
δὲ ἤτοι οὐκ εἰσίν, ἢ οὐ μέλει αὐτοῖς τῶν ἀνθρωπ. 
εἴων, τί μοι ζῆν ἐν κόσμῳ κενῷ θεῶν ἢ προνοίας 
κενῷ ; ἀλλὰ καὶ εἰσί, καὶ μέλει αὐτοῖς τῶν 
ἀνθρωπείων" καὶ τοῖς μὲ» KAT "ad evar κακοῖς 
ἵνα μὴ περιπτίπτῃ ὁ ἄνθρωπος, ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ τὸ πᾶν 
ἔθεντο: τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν εἴ τι κακὸν ἣν, καὶ τοῦτο 
ἂν προείδοντο, ἵ ἵνα ἐπὶ παντὶ 2 TO μὴ περιπίπτειν 
αὐτῷ. ὃ δὲ χείρω μὴ ποιεῖ ἄνθρωπον, πῶς ἂν 
τοῦτο βίον ἀνθρώπου χείρω ποιήσειεν; οὔτε δὲ 
KAT ἄγνοιαν οὔτο εἰδιΐα μέν, μὴ δυναμένη δὲ 
προφυλάξασθαι ἢ διορθώσασθαι ταῦτα, ἢ τῶν 
ὅλων φύσις παρεῖδεν ἄν" οὔτε ἂν τηλικοῦτον 
ἥμαρτεν ἤτοι map ἀδυναμίαν ἢ παρ᾽ ἀτεχνίαν, 
ἵνα τὰ ἀγαθὰ καὶ τὰ κακὰ ἐπίσης τοῖς τε ἀγαθοῖς 
ἀνθρώποις καὶ τοῖς κακοῖς πεφυρμέπνως up Pay. 
θάνατος δέ ye Kal ζωή, δόξα καὶ ἀδοξία, πόνος καὶ 
ἡδονή, πλοῦτος καὶ πενία, πάντα ταῦτα ἐπίσης 
συμβαίνει ἀνθρώπων τοῖς τε ἀγαθοῖς καὶ τοῖς 
κακοῖς οὔτε καλὴ ὄντα οὔτε αἰσχρά. οὔτ᾽ ἄρ᾽ 
ἀγαθὰ οὔτε κακά ἐστι!". 

if. Has πάντα ταχέως. ἐναφανίξιται, τῷ μὲν 
κόσμῳ αὐτὰ τὰ σώματα, τῷ δὲ αἰῶνι αἱ μνῆμαι 
αὐτῶν: οἷά ἐστι τὰ αἰσθητὰ πάντα καὶ μάλιστα 
τὼ ἡδονῇ δελεάζοντα ἢ τῷ πόνῳ φοβοῦντα ἢ τῷ 
τύφῳ διαβεβοημένα, πῶς εὐτελῆ καὶ εὐκατα- 
φρόνητα καὶ ῥυπαρὰ καὶ εὔφθαρτα καὶ νεκρώ, 
νοερᾶς δυνάμεως ἐφιστάναι. τί εἰσιν οὗτοι, ὧν αἱ 
ὑπολήψεις καὶ αἱ φωναὶ τὴν εὐδοξίαν «παρ- 





? cp. Fronto, de Nep. Nab. p. 233. 2 iv. 8. 
34 


BOOK II 


there are Gods, is nothing dreadful; for they would 
not involve thee in evil. But if indeed there are no 
Gods, or if they do not concern themselves with the 
affairs of me n, what boots it for me to hve in a 
Universe whete there are no Gods, where Providence 
is not? Nay, but there are Gods, ane they do con- 
cern themselves with human things ; ;/ and they have 
put it wholly in man’s power not to fall into evils 
that are truly such. And had there been any evil in 
what lies beyond, for this too would they have made 
provision, that it should be in every man’s power not 
to fall into it. But how can that make a man’s life 
worse which does not make the man worse?? Yet 
the Nature of the Whole could not have been guilty 
of an oversight from ignorance or, while cognizant of 
these things, through lack of power to euard avainst 
or amend them ; ; nor could it have gone so far amiss 
either from inability or unskilfulness, as to allow good 
and evil to fall without any discrimination alike upon 
the eviland the good. Still itis a fact that death and 
life, honour and dishonour, pain and pleasure, riches 
and penury, do among men one and all betide the 
Good and the Evil alike, being in themselves neither 
honourable nor shameful. Consequentl y they are 
neither good nor evil. 

12. How quickly all things vanish away, in the 
Universe their actual bodies, and the remembrance of 
them in Eternity, and of what character are all objects 
of sense, and particularly those that entice us with 
pleasure or terrify us with pain or are acclaimed by 
vanity—-how worthless and despicable and unclean 
and ephemeral and dead !—this is for our faculty of 
intelligence to apprehend ; as also what they really 
are whose conceptions and whose voices award 


35 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


éyouot>.' τί ἐστε τὸ ἀποθανεῖν, καὶ ὅτι, ἐάν τις 
αὐτὸ μόνον toy καὶ τῷ μερισμῷ τῆς ἐννοίας δια. 
λύσῃ τὰ ἐμφανταζόμενωα αὐτῷ, οὐκέτε ἄλλο τι 
ὑπολήψεται αὐτὸ εἶναι ἢ φύσεως ἔργον: φύσεως 
δὲ ἔργον εἴ τις φοβεῖται, παιδίον ἐστίν" τοῦτο μέντοι 
οὐ μόνον φύσεως ἔργον ἐστίν, ἀλλὰ καὶ συμφέρον 
αὐτῇ. πῶς ἅπτεται θεοῦ ἄνθρωπος, καὶ κατὰ τί 
ἑαυτοῦ μέρος, καὶ ὅταν πῶς [éxy| διακέηται 5 τὸ 
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου τοῦτο μόριον. 

ιγ΄. Οὐδὲν ἀθλιώτερον τοῦ πάντα κύκλῳ ἐκπερι- 
ἐρχομένου. καὶ “τὰ νέρθεν yas,” φησίν, ὦ ἐρευνῶν- 
TOS, καὶ τὰ ἐν ταῖς ψυχωῖς τῶν πλησίον διὰ 
τεκμάρσεως ζητοῦντος, μὴ αἰσθομένου δέ, ὅτε ἀρκεῖ 
πρὸς μόνῳ τῷ ἔνδον ἑαυτοῦ δαί pove εἶναι καὶ τοῦτον 
γνησίως θεραπεύειν. θεραπεία δὲ αὐτοῦ, καθαρὸν 
πάθους διατηρεῖν καὶ εἰκαιότητος καὶ ἴυσ. 
ἀρεστήσεως τῆς πρὸς τὰ ἐκ θεῶν καὶ ἀνθρώπων 
γινόμενα. τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἐκ θεῶν αἰδέσιμα δι 
ἀρετήν" τὰ δὲ ἐξ ἀνθρώπων φίλα διὰ συγγένειαν, 
ἔστι δὲ OTE καὶ τρόπον τινὰ ἐλεεινὰ OL ἄγνοιαν 
ἀγαθῶν καὶ κακῶν" οὐκ ἐλώττων ἡ πήρωσις αὕτη 
τῆς στερισκούσης τοῦ διακρίνειν τὰ λευκὰ καὶ 
μέλανα. 

10. Kav τρισχίλια ἔτη βιώσεσθαι μέλλῃς, καὶ 
τοσαυτάκις μύρια, ὅμως μέμνησο OTL οὐδεὶς ἄλλον 

1 «παρέχουσι: Gat, 


2 ris ἔχῃ διακαίηται A: ἔχῃ ἢ διακ. Cor.: ποσαχῇ Kader- 
macher. 





1 Pindar, ray. (see Plato, Theaet. 173 8). 

8 17; 11, 6, 16. cp. Shaks, Vemp. ai. 1. 275: ‘Con- 
science, this deity in my bosom.” The δαιμόνι» of Socrates 
is well known. 


36 


BOOK II 


renown ; what it is to die, and that ic a man look at 
death in itself, and with the analysis of reason strip 
it of its phantom terrors, no longer will he conceive 
it to be aught but a function of Nature,—but if a 
man be frightened by a function of Nature, he is 
childish ; and this is not only Nature’s function but 
her welfare ;—and how man is in touch with God 
and with what part of himself, and in what disposi- 
tion of this portion of the man. 

13. Nothing can be more miserable than the 
man who goes through the whole round of things, 
and, as the poet says, pries into the secrets of 
the earth, and would fain guess the thoughts in 
his neighbour’s heart, while having no conception 
that he needs but to associate himself with the 
divine ‘genius’ in his bosom,? and to serve it 
truly. And service of it is to keep it pure from 
passion and aimlessness and discontent with any- 
thing that proceeds from Gods or men. For that 
which proceeds from the Gods is worthy of rever- 
ence in that it is excellent; and that which proceeds 
from men, of love, in that they are akin, and, at 
times and in a manner,’ of compassion, in that they 
are ignorant of good and evil—a defect this no less 
than the loss of power to distinguish between white 
and black. 

14. Even if thy life is to last three thousand years 
or for the matter of that thirty thousand, yet bear in 
mind that no one ever parts with any other life than 


ὁ Marcus qualifies his departure from the strict Stoic view, 
for which see Seneca de Clem. ii 4-6, where he calls pity 
pusillanimity, and says sapiens non maserebitur sed succurret 
Marcus was far from a Stoic in this, see Herodiani 4, 8 9 
See above, p. xin. 


37 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Soa 


ἀποβάλλει βίον ἢ τοῦτον ὃν ζῆ" οὐδὲ ἄλλον ζῇ ἢ Ov 
ἀποβάλλει. εἰς ταὐτὸ οὖν καθίσταται τὸ μήκιστ- 
ον τῷ βραωχυτάτῳ. τὸ γὰρ παρὸν πᾶσιν ἴσον, καὶ 
τὸ ἀπολλύμενον οὐκ ἴδιον"! καὶ τὸ ἀποβαλλόμενον 
οὕτως ἀκαριαῖον ἀναφαίνεται. οὔτε γὰρ τὸ παρῳχ- 
ηκὸς οὔτε τὸ μέλλον ἀποβάλλοι ἄν τις. ὃ γὰρ 
οὐκ ἔχει, πῶς ἂν τοῦτό τις αὐτοῦ ἀφέλοιτο; 
τούτων οὖν τῶν δύο δεῖ μεμνῆσθαι: ἑνὸς μέν, ὅτι 
πάντα ἐξ ἀιδίου ὁμοειδῆ καὶ ἀνακυκλούμενα, καὶ 
οὐδὲν διαφέρει πότερον ἐν ἑκατὸν ἔτεσιν ἢ ἐν δια- 
κοσίοις ἢ ἐν τῷ ἀπείρῳ χρόνῳ τὰ αὐτά τις Operas: 
ἑτέρου δέ, OTL καὶ ὁ πολυχρονιώτατος καὶ ὁ τάχισ- 
τα τεθνηξόμενος τὸ ἴσον ἀποβάλλει. τὸ γὰρ 
παρὸν ἐστὶ μόνον, οὗ στερίσκεσθαι μέλλει, εἴπερ 
γε ἔχει καὶ τοῦτο μόνον καί, ὃ μὴ ἔχει TLS, οὐκ 
ἀποβάλλει. 

ιε΄. Ὅτε πᾶν ὑπόληψις. δῆλα μὲν γὰρ τὰ πρὸς 
τὸν Κυνικὸν Μόνιμον λεγόμενα" δῆλον δὲ καὶ τὸ 
χρήσιμον τοῦ λεγομένου, ἐάν τις αὐτοῦ τὸ νόστ- 
μον μέχρι τοῦ ἀληθοῦς δέχηται. 

ἐφ΄. Ὑβρίζει ἑαυτὴν ἡ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ψυχή, 
μάλεστα μέν, ὅταν ἀπόστημα καὶ οἷον φῦμα τοῦ 
κόσμου, ὅσον ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῇ, γένηται. τὸ γὰρ δυσχερ- 

\ / f 

avery τινὶ τῶν γινομένων ἀπόστασίς ἐστι τῆς 
φύσεως, ἧς ἐν μέρει <ai> ἑκάστου τῶν λοιπῶν 
φύσεις περιέχονται" ἔπειτα δέ, ὅταν ἄνθρωπόν 
τινα ἀποστραφῇ, ἢ καὶ ἐναντία φέρηται, ὡς 


1 οὐκ PA: οὖν (δύ. ; ἴσον PAD: ἴδιον Schenk. 





lout. 10. 2 Sen. Mat. Q. νι 32 acd fin. 3 xi. 36. 
+ σῦφον εἶναι τὰ πάντα, Menander, Mrag. 249, Kock (Diog. 


38 


BOOK II 


the one he is now living,! nor lives any other than that 
which he now parts with. The longest life, then, and 
the shortest amount but to the same. For the 
present time is of equal duration for all, while that 
which we lose is not ours ;? and consequently what is 
parted with is obviously a mere moment. No man can 
part with either the past or the future. For how 
can aman be deprived of what he does not possess? 
These two things, then, must needs be remembered : 
the one, that all things from time everlasting have 
been cast in the same mould and repeated cycle 
after cycle, and so it makes no difference whether a 
man see the same things recur through a hundred 
years or two hundred,’? or through eternity: the 
other, that the longest liver and he whose time to 
die comes soonest part with no more the one than the 
other. For it is but the present that a man can be 
deprived of, if, as is the fact, it is this alone that he 
has, and what he has not a man cannot part with. 

15. Remember that everything is but what we 
think it. For obvious indeed is the saying fathered 
on Monimus the Cynic, obvious too the utility of 
what was said,’ if one accept the gist of it as far as 
it is true. 

16. The soul of man does wrong to itself then 
most of all, when it makes itself, as far as it can 
do so, an imposthume and as it were a malignant 
growth in the Universe. For to grumble at anything 
that happens is a rebellion against Nature, in some 
part of which are bound up the natures of all other 
things. And the soul wrongs itself then again, when 
it turns away from any man or even opposes him with 


Laert. vi. 3, § 2): Sext. Empir. (Adv, Log, iit. 1) attributes 
the saying to Monimus. 


39 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


βλάψουσα, οἷαί εἰσιν ai τῶν ὀργιζομένων. τρίτον 
ὑβρίζει ἑαυτήν, ὅταν ἡσσᾶται ἡδονῆς ἢ πόνου. 
τέταρτον, ὅταν ὑποκρίνηται καὶ ἐπιπλάστως καὶ 
ἀναλήθως τι ποιῇ ἢ λέγῃ. πέμπτον, ὅταν πρᾶξίν 
τίνα ἑαυτῆς καὶ ὁρμὴν ἐπ᾽ οὐδένα σκοπὸν ἀφιῇ, 
ἀλλὰ εἰκῇ καὶ ἀπαρακολουθήτως ὁτιοῦν ἐνεργῇ, 
δέον καὶ τὰ μικρότατα κατὰ τὴν ἐπὶ τὸ τέλος 
ἀναφορὰν γίνεσθαι" τέλος δὲ λογικῶν ζῴων, 
τὸ ἕπεσθαι τῷ τῆς πόλεως καὶ πολιτείας τῆς 
πρεσβυτάτης χόγῳ καὶ θεσμῷ. 

εζ΄. Τοῦ ἀνθρωπίνου βίον ὁ μὲν χρόνος, 
στιγμή, ἡ δὲ οὐσία ῥέουσα, ἡ δὲ αἴσθησις 
ἀμυδρά, ἡ δὲ ὅλου τοῦ σώματος σύγκρισις 
εὔσηπτος, ἡ δὲ ψυχὴ ῥόμβος, ἡ δὲ τύχη 
δυστέκμαρτον, ἡ δὲ φήμη ἄκριτον' συνελόντι 
δὲ εἰπεῖν, πάντα τὰ μὲν τοῦ σώματος ποταμός, 
τὰ δὲ τῆς ψυχῆς ὄνειρος καὶ τῦφος: ὁ δὲ βίος 
πόλεμος καὶ ξένου ἐπιδημία ἡ δὲ ὑστεροφημία 
λήθη. τί οὖν τὸ παραπέμψαι δυνάμενον; ν 
καὶ μόνον φιλοσοφία. τοῦτο δὲ ἐν τῷ τηρεῖν 
τὸν ἔνδον δαίμονα ἀνύβριστον καὶ ἀσινῆ, ἡδονῶν 
καὶ πόνων κρείσσονα, μηδὲν εἰκῇ ποιοῦντα μηδὲ 
διεψευσμένως καὶ μεθ᾽ ὑποκρίσεως, ἀνενδεῆ τοῦ 
ἄλλον ποιῆσαί τι ἢ μὴ ποιῆσαι: ἔτι δὲ τὰ συμ- 
βαίνοντα καὶ ἀπονεμόμενα δεχόμενον, ὡς ἐκεῖθέν 
ποθεν ἐρχόμενα ὅθεν αὐτὸς ἦλθεν. ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ 
τὸν θάνατον thew τῇ γνώμῃ περιμένοντα, ὡς 
οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ λύσιν τῶν στοιχείων ἐξ ὧν ἕκαστον 
ξῷον συγκρίνεται. εἰ δὲ αὐτοῖς τοῖς στοιχείοις 


Lep. Eur. Pray. 107: ὅταν γλυκείας ἡδονῆ5 ἥσσων τις ἢ. 
2 Aristides Paneg. ad Cyzic. § 427 (Jebb), 6 γὰρ λογισμὸς 


49 


BOOK II 


intent to do him harm, as is the case with those who 
are angry. It does wrong to itself, thirdly, when it 
is overcome by pleasure? or pain. Fourthly, when 
it assumes a mask, and in act or word is insincere or 
untruthful. Fifthly, when it directs some act or desire 
of its own towards no mark, and expends its energy 
on any thing whatever aimlessly and unadvisedly, 
whereas even the most trifling things should be 
done with reference to the end in view. Now the 
end for rational beings is to submit themselves to 
the reason and law of that archetypal city and 
polity ?—the Universe. 

17. Of the life of man the duration is but a 
point, its substance streaming away, its perception 
dim, the fabric of the entire body prone to decay, 
and the soul a vortex, and fortune incalculable, and 
fame uncertain. IJna word all the things of the body 
are as a river, and the things of the soul as a dream 
and a vapour; and life is a warfare and a pilgrim’s 
sojourn, and fame after death is only forgetfulness. 
What then is it that can help us on our way? One 
thing and one alone—Philosophy; and this consists 
in keeping the divine ‘genius’ within pure? and 
unwronged, lord of all pleasures and pains, doing 
nothing aimlessly ἢ or with deliberate falsehood and 
hypocrisy, independent of another's action or in- 
action; and furthermore welcoming what happens 
and is allotted, as issuing from the same source, 
whatever it be, from which the man himself has 
issued ; and above all waiting for death with a good 
grace as being but a setting free of the elements of 
which every thing living is made up. But if there 
αὐτῶν (Marcus and Lucius) θεῖος καὶ ὡς ἀληθῶς ἄνωθεν ἔχων τὸ 


παράδειγμα, καὶ πρὸς ἐκείνην ὁρῶν τὴν πολιτείαν. 
38 18, 4 8 δ, 16. 


AT 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


\ X > ω va “ 2 ῳΦ 
μηδὲν δεινὸν ἐν τῷ ἕκαστοι: διηνεκῶς εἰς ἕτερον 
Ν 4 ς “ 
μεταβάλλειν, διὰ τί ὑπίδηταί τις τὴν πάντων 
\ \ ὃ / \ / , 
μεταβολὴν καὶ διάλυσιν; κατὰ φύσιν yap 
\ \ / 
οὐδὲν δὲ κακὸν κατὰ φύσιν. 
Ν 
Τὰ ἐν Καρνούντῳ." 


1 These words may very possibly be mtended as a heading 


for Book IIT. 


42 


BOOK I] 


be nothing terrible in each thing being continuously 
changed into another thing, why should a man look 
askance at the change and dissolution of all things? 
For it is in the way of Nature, and in the way of 
Nature there can be no evil. 


Written at Carnuntum.+ 


1 Now Haimburg in Hungary. 


43 


ΒΙΒΛΙΟΝ [ 


a. Οὐχὶ τοῦτο μόνον δεῖ λογίξεσθαι ὅτι καθ᾽ 
ἑκάστην ἡμέραν ἀπαναλίσκεται ὁ βίος καὶ μέρος 
ἔλαττον αὐτοῦ Ka ταλείπεται" ὠλλὰ κἀκεῖνο λογισ- 
τέον ὅτι, εἰ ἐπὶ πλέον βιώῃ τίς, ἐκεῖνό γε 

ἄδηλον, εἰ ἐξαρκέσει ὁμοία αὖθις ἡ ἣ διάνοια πρὸς 
τὴν σύνεσιν τῶν πραγμάτων καὶ τῆς θεωρίας 
τῆς συντεινούσης εἰς τὴν ἐμπειρίαν τῶν τε θείον 
καὶ τῶν ἀνθρωπείων. ἐὰν γὰρ παραληρεῖν 
ἄρξηται, τὸ μὲν διαπνεῖσθαι καὶ τρέφεσθαι καὶ 
φαντάξεσθαι καὶ ὁρμᾶν καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα τοιαῦτα 
οὐκ ἐνδεήσει' τὸ δὲ ἑαυτῷ χρῆσθαι, καὶ τοὺς τοῦ 
καθήκοντος ἀριθμοὺς ἀκριβοῦν, καὶ τὰ προφαιν- 
όμενα διαρθροῦν, καὶ περὶ αὐτοῦ τοῦ, εἰ ἤδη 
ἐξακτέον αὑτόν, ἐφιστάνειν, καὶ ὅσα τοιαῦτα 
λογισμοῦ συγγεγυμνασμένου πάνυ xen vet, 7 po- 
atoa BévyuTas. χρὴ οὖν ἐπείγεσθαι, οὐ μόνον τῷ 


----- 





1 vi. 106, Arist. Probl 1. 21 ὅπερ ἐν τῷ θώρακι ἀναπνοή, τοῦτο 
ἐν τῷ σώματι διαπνοὴ διὰ τῶν ἀρτηριῶν (arterial breathing). 

2 ep. Sen. Hp. 60 vivit ὃς σι se ulitur. Twi. 26. 

4x. 8,§3. The right of suicide was part of the Stoic 
creed (Zeno and Cleanthes both took their own lives). Mareus 
allows it when circumstances make it mmpossible for a man 
to live his true life (v. 29; vin. 47; x. 8. ep. Epict 
1 24, §20; i 25, § 18). Hadrian (Degest 28. 3. 6, §7) 


44 


BOOK Ill 


1. We ought not to think only upon the fact that 
our life each day is waning away, what is left of it 
being ever less, but this also should be a subject for 
thought, that even if life be prolonged, yet is it 
uncertain whether the mind will remain equally 
fitted in the future for the understanding of facts 
and for that contemplation which strains after the 
knowledge of things divine and human. For if 
« man has entered upon his dotage, there will still 
be his the power of breathing,! and digestion, and 
thought, and desire, and all such-like faculties; but 
the full use of himself? the accurate appreciation 
of the items* of duty, the nice discrimimation of 
what presents itself to the senses, and a clear 
judgment on the question whether it is time for 
him to end his own life,* and all such decisions, as 
above all require well-trained powers of reasoning— 
these are already flickering out in him. It needs, 
then, that we should press onwards, not only because 


enumerates as causes of suicide taediwm mtae, valetudinis 
adversae umpatrentia, vactutio (in the case of certain philo- 
sophers). Marcus lumself, if Dio (71. 30, § 2) 1s to be 
trusted, threatened, in a letter to the Senate, to commit 
suicide, and according to Capitolinus (xxviii. 3) actually 
hastened his own death by abstaming from food. 


45 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἐγγυτέρω τοῦ θανάτου ἑκάστοτε γίνεσθαι, ἀλλὰ 
καὶ διὰ τὸ τὴν ἐννόησιν τῶν πρωγμάτων καὶ τὴν 
παρακολούθησιν πιροαπολδήγειν. 

β΄. Χρὴ καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα παραφυλάσσειν, ὅτι 
καὶ τὰ ἐπιγινόμενα τοῖς φύσει γινομένοις ἔχει τι 
εὔχαρι καὶ ἐπαγωγόν. ; οἷον ἄρτου ὀπτωμένου 
παραρρήγνυταί τινα μέρη, καὶ ταῦτα οὖν τὰ 

ιέχοντα οὕτως, καὶ τρόπον τινὰ παρὰ τὸ ἐπάγ- 
γελμα τῆς ἀρτοποιέας ἔχοντα, CTT PET EL πως Kal 
προθυμίαν πρὸς τὴν τροφὴν ἰδίως ὦ ἀνακινεῖ. πάλιν 

4 \ 
τε τὰ σῦκα, ὁπότε ὡραιότατα ἐστι, κέχηνεν. καὶ 
ἐν ταῖς δρυπεπέσιν ἐλαίαις αὐτὸ τὸ ἐγγὺς τῇ 
σήψει ἴδιόν τί κάλλος τῷ καρπῷ προστίθησιν. 
καὶ οἱ στάχυες κάτω vevovTes, καὶ τὸ τοῦ λέοντος 
ἐπισκύνιον, καὶ ὁ τῶν συῶν ἐκ τοῦ στόματος ῥέων 
ἀφρός, καὶ πολλὰ ἕτερα, κατ᾽ ἰδίαν εἴ τις σκοπ- 
οἴη, πόρρω ὄντα τοῦ εὐειδοῦς, ὅμως διὰ τὸ τοῖς 
φύσει γινομένοις ἐπακολουθεῖν συνεπικοσμεῖ καὶ 
Ψυχαγωγεῖ. 

“ὥστε, εἴ τις ἔχει πάθος καὶ ἔννοιαν βαθυτέραν 
πρὸς τὰ ἐν τῷ ὅλῳ γινόμενα, σχεδὸν οὐδὲν 
οὐχὶ δόξει αὐτῷ καὶ τῶν κατ᾽ ἐπακολούθησιν 
συμβαινόντων ἡδέως πως ἰδίᾳ συνίστασθαι. ἷ 
οὗτος δὲ καὶ θηρίων ἀληθῆ χάσματα οὐχ ἧσσον 
ἡδέως ὄψεται ἢ ὅσα γραφεῖς καὶ πλάσται μιμού- 
μενοι δεικνύουσιν: καὶ γραὸς καὶ γέροντος ἀκμήν 
τινα καὶ ὥραν καὶ τὸ ἐν παισὶν ἐπαφρόδιτον 


1 Lofft for διασυνίστασθαι PA. 





1 A very fine early medallion shows Marcus in full chase 
after a wild boar (Grueber, Plate xviii.). cp. Dio 71. 36, § 2, 
σῦς ἀγρίους ἐν θήρᾳ κατέβαλλεν ἀπὸ ἵππου; Fronto, ad Cus. 
iii. 20; iv. 5; Capit. iv. 9. 


46 


BOOK III 


we come each moment nearer to death, but also 
because our insight into facts and our close touch of 
them is gradually ceasing even before we die. 

Such things as this also we ought to note 
with care, that the accessories too of natural 
operations have a charm and attractiveness of their 
own. For instance, when bread is in the baking, 
some of the parts split open, and these very fissures, 
though in a sense thwarting the bread-maker’s 
design, have an appropriateness of their own and in 
a peculiar way stimulate the desire for food. Again 
when figs are at their ripest, they gape open; and 
in olives that are ready to fall their very approach to 
over-ripeness gives a peculiar beauty to the fruit. 
And the full ears of corn bending downwards, and 
the lion’s beetling brows, and the foam dripping from 
the jaws of the wild-boar,! and many other things, 
though, if looked at apart from their setting, they 
are far from being comely, yet, as resultants from the 
operations of Nature, lend them an added charm and 
excite our admiration. 

And so, if a man has sensibility and a deeper 
insight into the workings of the Universe, scarcely 
anything, though it exist only as a secondary con- 
sequence to something else, but will seem to him to 
form in its own peculiar way a pleasing adjunct to the 
whole. And he will look on the actual gaping jaws? 
of wild beasts * with no less pleasure than the repre- 
sentations of them by limners and modellers; and he 
will be able to see in the aged of either sex a mature 
prime and comely ripeness, and gaze with chaste eyes 

2 iv. 36. 

3 Such are the things Marcus noticed in the amphitheatre, 


and not the bloodshed which his soul abhorred (Dio 71. 
29, § 3). 


47 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ σώφροσιν ὀφθαλμοῖς ὁρᾶν δυνήσεται" 
καὶ πολλὰ τοιαῦτα οὐ παντὶ πιθανά, μόνῳ δὲ 
τῷ πρὸς τὴν φύσιν καὶ τὰ ταύτης ἔργα γνησίως 
ῳκειωμένῳ προσπεσεῖται. 

γ΄. Ἱπποκράτης πολλὰς νόσυυς ἰασάμενος 
αὐτὸς νοσήσας ἀπέθανεν. οἱ Χαλδαῖοι πολλῶν 
θανάτους Tponyopevoav, εἶτα καὶ αὐτοὺς τὸ 
πεπρωμένον κατέλαβεν. ᾿Αλέξανδρος καὶ ἴΤομ- 
πήϊνος καὶ Ιάιος Καῖσαρ ὅλας πόλεις ἄρδην 
τοσαυτάκις ἀνελόντες καὶ ἐν παρατάξει πολλὰς 
μυριάδας ἱππέων καὶ πεζῶν κατακόψαντες καὶ 
αὐτοί ποτε ἐξῆλθον τοῦ βίου. Ἡράκλειτος περὶ 
τῆς τοῦ κύσμου ἐκπυρώσεως τοσαῦτα φυσιολογή- 
σῶς ὕδατος τὰ ἐντὸς πληρωθεὶς βολβίτῳ κατα- 
κεχρισμένος ἀπέθανεν. Δημόκριτον δὲ οἱ φθεῖρες, 
Σωκράτην δὲ ἄλλοι φθεῖρες ἀπέκτειναν. 

Τί ταῦτα; ἐνέβης, ἔπλευσας, κατηχθης" ἔκβηθι. 
εἰ μὲν ἐφ᾽ ἕτερον βίον, οὐδὲν θεῶν κενὸν οὐδὲ € ἐκεῖ" 
εἰ δὲ ἐν ἀναισθησίᾳ, παύσῃ πόνων καὶ ἡδονῶν 
ἀνεχόμενος καὶ λατρεύων τοσούτῳ εἰρονι τῷ 
ἀγγείῳ Τῆπερ ἐστὶ 1 στὸ ὑπηρετοῦν" τὸ μὲν γὰρ 
νοῦς καὶ δαίμων, τὸ δὲ γῆ καὶ λύθρος. 

δ΄. Μὴ κατατρίψῃς τὸ ὑπολειπόμενον τοῦ 
βίου μέρος ἐν ταῖς περὶ ἑτέρων φαντασίαις, 
ὁπόταν μὴ τὴν ἀναφορὰν ἐπί τι κοινωφελὲς ποιῇ. 
ἤτοι γὰρ ἄλλου ἔργου otépy, τουτέστι φανταζύό- 


1 ἢ (ἢ A) περίεστι PC: ἢ πέρ ἐστι 1). 





1 iv. 48. 

* Told of Pherecydes (Diog. Laert. Pher. v, viii), of 
Speusippus (Spews ix.), and even of Plato (Plato xxix.), 
but not elsewhere of Democritus. Lucian (Ὁ, Afacrub 15, 
says Democritus died of starvation aged 104. 


48 


BOOK [ἢ 


upon the alluring loveliness of the young. And many 
such things there are which do not appeal to everyone, 
but will come home to him alone who is genuinely 
intimate with Nature and her works. 

3. Hippocrates, after healing many a sick man, 
fell sick himself and died. Many a death have 
Chaldaeans foretold, and then their own fate has 
overtaken them also Alexander, Pompeius and 
Gaius Caesar times without number utterly destroyed 
whole cities, and cut to pieces many myriads of horse 
and foot on the field of battle, yet the day came 
when they too departed this life. Heraclitus, after 
endless speculations on the destruction of the world 
by fire, came to be filled internally with water, and 
died beplastered with cowdung. And lice caused the 
death of Democritus,? and other vermin of Socrates. 

What of this? Thou hast gone aboard, thou 
hast set sail, thou hast touched land; go ashore; if 
indeed for another life, there is nothing even there 
void of Gods; but if to a state of non-sensation,’ thou 
shalt cease being at the mercy of pleasure and pain 
and lackeying the bodily vessel * which is so much 
baser than that which ministers to it. For the one 
is intelligence and a divine ‘genius, the other 
dust and ‘putr escence. 

4, Fritter not away what is left of thy life in 
thoughts about others, unless thou canst bring these 
thoughts into relation with some common interest. 
For verily thou dost hereby cut thyself off from 
other work, that is, by thinking what so and so is 


3 cp, Justin, Apol. i. 88 18, 57. 

4 So ras anime Cie. Tuse. 1. 22, § 52. ep. St. Paul, 1 Thess. 
iv. 4 (σκεῦος); Dio Chrys. Or. xin. 404 R. ἀνθρώπινον σῶμα ὡς 
ἀγγεῖον ppornaews καὶ λόγου 


40 


ac 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


μενος τί ὁ δεῖνα πράσσει καὶ τίνος ἕνεκεν καὶ τί 
λέγει καὶ τί ἐνθυμεῖται καὶ τί τεχνάζεται καὶ 
ὅσα τοιαῦτα ποιεῖ ἀπορρέμβεσθαι τῆς τοῦ ἰδίου 
ἡγεμονικοῦ παρατηρήσεως. 

Χρὴ μὲν οὖν καὶ τὸ εἰκῇ καὶ μάτην ἐν τῷ 
εἱρμῷ τῶν φαντασιῶν περιίστασθαι, mor δὲ 
μάλιστα τὸ περίεργον καὶ κακόηθες" καὶ ἐθιστέον 
ἑαυτὸν μόνα φαντάζεσθαι, περὶ ὧν εἴ τις ἄφνω 
ἐπανέροιτο' «ΠΥ νῦν διανοῇ; ᾿ μετὰ παρρησίας 
παραχρῆμα ἂν ἀποκρίναιο, ὅτι τὸ καὶ τό' ὡς 
ἐξ αὐτῶν εὐθὺς δῆλα εἶναι, ὅτι πάντα ἁπλᾶ καὶ 
εὐμενῆ, καὶ ζῴου κοινωνικοῦ καὶ ἀμελοῦντος 
ἡδονικῶν 1 ἢ ) καθάπαξ ἀπολαυστικῶν φαντασμάτων 

ἢ φιλονεικίας τινὸς ἢ βασκανίας καὶ ὑποψίας ἢ 
ἄχλου τινὸς ep ᾧ av ἐρυθριάσειας ἐξηγούμενος, 
ὅτι ἐν νῷ αὐτὸ εἶχες. 

Ὃ γάρ τοι ἀνὴρ ὁ τοιοῦτος, οὐκ ἔτι ὑπερ- 
τιθέμενος τὸ ὡς ἐν ἀρίστοις ἤδη εἶναι, ἱερεύς 
τίς ἐστι καὶ ὑπουργὸς θεῶν, χρώμενος καὶ τῷ 
ἔνδον ἱδρυμένῳ αὐτῷ, ὃ παρέχεται τὸν ἄνθρωπον 
ἄχραντον ἡδονῶν, ἄτρωτον ὑπὸ παντὸς πόνου, 
πάσης ὕβρεως ἀνέπαφον, πίσ ns ἀναίσθητον 
“πονηρίας, ἀθλητὴν ἄθλου τοῦ μεγίστου, τοῦ ὑπὸ 
μηδενὸς πάθους καταβληθῆναι, δῶ ταν: βε- 
βαμμένον εἰς βάθος, ἀσπαξύμενον μὲ» ἐξ ὅλης 
τῆς ψυχῆς Ta συμβαίνοντα καὶ ἀπονεμόμενα 
πάντα, μὴ πολλάκις δὲ μηδὲ χωρὶς μεγάλης 
καὶ κοινωφελοῦς ἀνάγκης φανταζόμενον, τί ποτε 
ἄλλος λέγει ἢ πράσσει ἢ διανοεῖται. μόνα γὰρ 


- 





1 rn 
11. eo. 
2 op. Fronto, ad Am. i. 12: nullum ext feclum mewn 
dictwinve quod clam ceteris esse σαν * quia cucus cet mohenet 


50 


BOOK Il 


doing and why, what he is saying, having what in 
mind, contriving what, and all the many like things 
such as whirl thee aside from keeping close watch 
over thine own ruling Reason. 

We ought therefore to eschew the aimless? and the 
unprofitable in the chain of our thoughts, still more all 
that is over-curious and ill-natured, and a man should 
accustom himself to think only of those things about 
which, if one were to ask on a sudden, What ts 
now in thy thoughts? thou couldest quite frankly 
answer at once, Zhis or thal; so that thine answer 
should ummediately make manifest that all that is in 
thee is simple and kindly and worthy of a living 
being that is social and has no thought for pleasures 
or for the entire range of sensual images, or for any 
rivalry, envy, suspicion, or anything else, whereat 
thou wouldest blush to admit that thou hadst it in 
thy mind.? 

For in truth such a man, one who no longer puts 
off being reckoned now, if never before, among the 
best, is in some sort a priest and minister of the 
Gods, putting to use also that wlnch, enthroned 
within him,? keeps the man unstained by pleasures, 
invulnerable to all pain, beyond the reach of any 
wrong, proof against all evil, a champion in the 
highest of championships—that of never being over- 
thrown by any passion—dyed in grain with justice, 
welcoming with all his soul everything that befalls 
and is allotted him, and seldom, nor yet without 
a great and a general necessity, concerning himself 
with the words or deeds or thoughts of another. 
wpse consctus sim, ceferos quogue omnes ἰδίῳ mecum scire 


velim. 
341 13. 1735 in. 6. 16. 


51 


te 
bo 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τὰ ἑαυτοῦ πρὸς ἐνέργειαν ἔχει, καὶ τὰ ἑαυτῷ ἐκ 
τῶν ὅλων συγκλωθόμενα διηνεκῶς ἐννοεῖ: κἀκεῖνα 
μὲν καλὰ παρέχεται, ταῦτα δὲ ἀγαθὰ εἶναι πέ- 
πείσται. ἡ γὰρ ἑκάστῳ νεμομένη μοῖρα συνεμ- 
φέρεταί τε καὶ συνεμφέρει. 

Μέμνηται δὲ καὶ ὅτι συγγενὲς πᾶν τὸ λογικόν, 
καὶ ὅτι κήδεσθαι μὲν πάντων ἀνθρώπων κατὰ 
τὴν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου φύσιν ἐστί' δόξης δὲ οὐχὶ τῆς 
παρὰ πάντων ἀνθεκτέον ἀλλὰ τῶν ὁμολογουμένως 
τῇ φύσει βιούντων μόνων. οἱ δὲ μὴ οὕτως βιοῦντες, 
ὁποῖοί τινες οἴκοι τε καὶ ἔξω τῆς οἰκίας, καὶ 
νύκτωρ καὶ μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν, οἷοι μεθ᾽ οἴων φύρονται, 
μεμνημένος διατελεῖ. οὐ τοίνυν οὐδὲ τὸν παρὰ 
τῶν τοιούτων ἔπαινον ἐν λόγῳ τίθεται, οἵγε οὐδὲ 
αὐτοὶ ἑαυτοῖς ἀρέσκονται. 

ε. Myre ἀκούσιος ἐνέργει μήτε ἀκοινώνητος 
μήτε ἀνεξέταστος μήτε ἀνθελκόμενος" μὴτε 
κομψεία τὴν διάνοιών σου καλλωπιζέτω: μήτε 
πολυρρήμων μήτε πολυπράγμων ἔσο. ἔτι δὲ ὁ ἐν 
σοὶ θεὸς ἔστω προστάτης ἕξῴου ἄρρενος, καὶ 
πρεσβύτου καὶ πολιτικοῦ καὶ Ῥωμαίου καὶ 
ἄρχοντος ἀνατεταχότος ἑαυτόν, οἷος ἂν εἴη τις 
περιμένων τὸ ἀνακλητικὸν ἐκ τοῦ βίου εὔλυτος, 
μήτε ὅρκου δεόμενος μήτε ἀνθρώπου τινὸς μάρτ- 
υρος. ἐν δὲ τὸ φαιδρὸν " καὶ TO ἀπροσδεὲς ἔξωθεν 
ὑπηρεσίας καὶ τὸ ἀπροσδεὲς ἡσυχίας, ἣν ἄλλοι 
παρέχουσιν. ὀρθὸν οὖν εἶναι χρή, οὐχὶ ὀρθού- 
μενον. 

1 ἕξει ADC 5. ἐν δὲ τὸ φαινόμενον AD. ἔτι Morus. 


52 


BOOK IT] 


For 1t is only the things which relate to himself that 
he brings within the scope of his activities, and he 
never ceases to ponder over what is being spun for 
him as his share in the fabric of the Universe, and he 
sees to it that the former are worthy, and is assured 
that the latter is good. For the fate which is 
allotted to each man is swept along with him in the 
Universe as well «s sweeps him along with 10.1 

And he bears in mind that all that is rational is 
akin, and that it is in man’s nature to care for all 
men, and that we should not embrace the opinion of 
all, but of those alone who live in conscious agree- 
ment with Nature. But what sort of men they, 
whose life is not after this pattern, are at home and 
abroad, by night and in the day, in what vices they 
wallow and with whom-—of this he is ever mindful. 
Consequently he takes no account of praise from such 
men, who in fact cannot even win their own approval. 

5. Do that thou doest neither unwillingly nor 
selfishly nor without examination nor against the 
grain. Dress not thy thought in too fine a garb. Be 
not a man of superfluous words or superfluous deeds. 
Moreover let the god that is in thee? be lord of a 
living creature, that is manly, and of full age, and 
concerned with statecraft, and a Roman, and a ruler, 
who hath taken his post as one who awaits the signal 
of recall from life in all readiness, needing no oath 
nor any man as his voucher. Be thine the cheery 
face and independence of help® from without and 
independence of such ease as others can give, It 
needs then to stand, and not be set, upright.* 


! Or, more abstractly, is conditioned no less than con- 


dittons. 2 ii. 13. 173 in. 0. 
* But see vil. 7. ὁ 1.15, 8 23 vii. 18. 


53 


ko 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


cs. Ee μὲν κρεῖττον εὑρίσκεις ἐν τῷ ἀν- 
θρωπίνῳ βίῳ δικαιοσύνης, ἀληθείας, σωφροσύνης, 
ὠνδρείας, καὶ καθάπαξ τοῦ ἀρκεῖσθαι ἑαυτῇ τὴν 
διάνοιάν σου ἐν οἷς κατὰ τὸν λόγον τὸν ὀρθὸν 
πράσσοντά σε παρέχεται, καὶ τῇ εἱμαρμένῃ ἐν 
τοῖς ἀπροαιρέτως ἀπονεμομένοις---εἰ τούτου, φημί, 
κρεῖττόν τι ὁρᾷς, ἐπ᾿ ἐκεῖνο ἐξ ὅλης τῆς ψυχῆς 
τραπόμενος τοῦ ἀρίστου εὑρισκομένου ἀπόλανυε. 

Ee δὲ μηδὲν κρεῖττον φαίνεται αὐτοῦ τοῦ ἐνιδρυ- 
μένου ἐν σοὶ δαίμονος, τάς τε ἰδίας ὁρμὰς 
ὑποτεταχότος ἑαυτῷ, καὶ τὰς φαντασίας eg- 
ετάζοντος, Kal τῶν αἰσθητικῶν πείσεων, ὡς ὁ 
Σωκράτης ἔλεγεν, ἑαυτὸν ἀφειλκυκότος, καὶ τοῖς 
θεοῖς ὑποτεταχότος ἑαυτὸν, καὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων 
προκηδομένου -- εἰ τούτου πάντα τὰ ἄλλα 
μικρότερα καὶ εὐτελέστερα εὑρίσκεις, pendent 
χώραν δίδου ἑ ἑτέρῳ, πρὸς ὃ ῥέψας ἅπαξ καὶ ἀπο- 
κλίνας οὐκ ἔτι ἀπερισπάστως τὸ ἀγαθὸν ἐκεῖνο 
τὸ ἴδιον καὶ τὸ σὸν προτιμᾶν δυνήσῃ ἀντικαθ- 
ῆσθαι γὰρ τῷ λογικῷ καὶ πολιτικῷ ὦ ἀγαθῷ οὐ 
θέμις οὐδ᾽ ὁτιοῦν _ETEPOYEVES, οἷον τὸν παρὰ τῶν 
πολλῶν ἔπαινον ἢ ἀρχὰς ἢ πλοῦτον 1 ἢ ἀπολαύσεις 
ἡδονῶν. πάντα ταῦτα, κἂν πρὸς ὀλίγον ἐναρ- 
pole δόξῃ, κατεκράτησεν ἄφνω καὶ παρήνεγκεν. 

Σὺ δέ, φημί, ἁπλῶς καὶ ἐλευθέρως ἑλοῦ τὸ 
κρεῖττον καὶ τούτου ἀντέχου" “ Κρεῖττον δὲ τὸ 
συμφέρον." εἰ μὲν τὸ ὡς λογικῷ, τοῦτο τήρει" εἰ 
δὲ τὸ ὡς ζῴῳ, ἀπόφηναι καὶ ἀτύφως φύλασσε 


1 ποιητικῷ PA: πολιτικῷ Gat. 





ἔχῃ, 4, 8. 8, 12, 16, or good ‘ genius,’ but cp. ui. 5, θεός. 


54 


BOOK ΠῚ 


6. If indeed thou findest in the life of man a 

. better thing than justice, than truth, than temper- 
ance, than manliness, and, m a word, than thy mind’s 

satisfaction with itself in things wherein it shews 

thee acting according to the true dictates of reason, 

and with destiny in what is allotted thee apart from 

thy choice—if, I say, thou seest anything better 

than this, turn to it with all thy soul and take thy 

fill of the best, as thou findest it. 

But if there appears nothing better than the very 
deity ! enthroned in thee, which has brought into 
subjection to itself all individual desires, which 
scrutinizes the thoughts, and, in the words of 
Socrates, has withdrawn itself from all the entice- 
ments of the senses, and brought itself into subjec- 
tion to the Gods, and cherishes a fellow-feeling for 
men—if thou findest everything else pettier and of 
less account than this, give place to nought else, to 
which if thou art but once plucked aside, and incline 
thereto, never more shalt thou be able without 
distraction to give paramount honour to that good 
which is thine own peculiar heritage. For it is not 
right that any extraneous thing at all, such as the 
praise of the many, or office, or wealth, or indul- 
gence in pleasure, should avail against that good 
which is identical with reason and a civie spirit. All 
these things, even if they seem for a little to fit 
smoothly into our lives, on a sudden overpower us 
and sweep us away. 

But do thou, I say, simply and freely choose the 
better and hold fast to 1t. But that is the better which 
is fo my interest. 11 it is to thy interest as a rational 
creature, hold that fast; but if as a mere animal, 
declare it boldly and maintain thy judgment without 


55 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τὴν κρίσιν: μόνον ὅπως ἀσφαλῶς τὴν ἐξέτασιν 
ποιήσῃ. 

ζ΄. Μὴ τιμήσῃς ποτὲ ὡς συμφέρον σεαυτοῦ, 
0 a ἀναγκάσει σέ ποτε τὴν πίστιν παραβῆναι, τὴν 
αἰδῶ ἐγκαταλιπεῖν, μισῆσαί τινα, ὑποπτεῦσαι, 
καταράσασθαι, ὑποκρίνασθαι, ἐπιθυμῆσαί τινος 
τοίχων καὶ παραπετασμάτων δεομένου. 0 γὰρ 
τὸν ἑαυτοῦ νοῦν καὶ δαίμονα καὶ τὰ ὄργια τῆς 
τούτου ἀρετῆς προελόμενος, τραγῳδίαν οὐ ποιεῖ, 
οὐ στενάζει, οὐκ ἐρημίας, οὐ πολυπληθείας 
δεήσεται: τὸ μέγιστον, ζήσει μήτε διώκων 
μήτε φεύγων' πότερον δὲ ἐπὶ πλέον διάστημα 
χρόνου τῷ σώματι περιεχομένῃ τῇ ψυχῇ ἢ 
ἐπ᾽ ἔλασσον χρήσεται, οὐδ᾽ ὁτιοῦν αὐτῷ μέλει" 
κἂν γὰρ ἤδη ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι δέῃ, οὕτως 
εὐλύτως ἄπεισιν, ὡς ἄλλο τι τῶν αἰδημόνως καὶ 
κοσμίως ἐνεργεῖσθαι δυναμένων € ἐνεργησείων, " τοῦ- 
TO μόνον παρ᾽ ὅλον τὸν βίον εὐλαβούμενος, τὸ ΤῊ» 
διάνοιαν ἔν τινι ἀνοικείῳ νοεροῦ «-καὶ; πολιτικοῦ 
ζῴου τροπῇ γενέσθαι. 

η . Οὐδὲν ἂν ἐν τῇ διανοίᾳ τοῦ κεκολασμένοι" 
καὶ ἐκκεκαθαρμένου πυῶδες οὐδὲ μὴν μεμολυσ- 
μένον οὐδὲ ὕπουλον εὕροις. οὐδὲ ἀσυντελῆ τὸν 
βίον αὐτοῦ ἡ πεπρωμένη καταλαμβάνει, ὡς ἄν 
τίς εἴποι τὸν τραγῳδὸν πρὸ τοῦ τελέσαι καὶ 
διαδραματίσαι ἀπαλλάσσεσθαι. ἔτι δὲ οὐδὲν 
δοῦλον οὐδὲ κομψόν, οὐδὲ προσδεδεμένον οὐδὲ 
ἀπεσχισμένον, οὐδὲ ὑπεύθυνον οὐδὲ ἐμφωλεῦον. 

θ΄. Τὴν ὑποληπτικὴν δύναμιν σέβε. ἐν ταύτῃ 


1 ἐνεργήσεων VP: ἐνεργήσειν A: ἐνεργησείων Radermacher. 


——— -οῦ 


1 ii. 16; Mpict. iii. 29, 8 106. ep. Plutarch, Sympos. vu. 5 
56 





BOOK ΠῚ 


arrogance. Only see to it that thou hast made thy 
enquiry without error. 

7. Prize not anything as being to thine interest that 
shall ever force thee to break thy troth, to surrender 
thine honour, to hate, suspect, or curse anvone, to 
play the hypocrite, to lust after anything that needs 
walls and curtains.! For he that has chosen before 
all else his own intelligence and good ‘ genius,’ and 
to be a devotee of its supreme worth, does not strike 
a tragic attitude or whine, nor will he ask for either 
a wilderness or a concourse of men; above all he 
will live neither chasmg anything nor shunning it. 
And he recks not at all whether he is to have his 
soul imprisoned in his body for a longer or a shorter 
span of time,’ for even if he must take his departure 
at once, he will go as willingly as if he were to 
discharge any other function that can be discharged 
with decency and orderliness, making sure through 
life of this one thing, that his thoughts should not 
in any case assume a character out of keeping with a 
rational and civic creature. 

8. In the mind of the man that has been chasteued 
and thoroughly cleansed thou wilt find no foul abscess 
or gangrene or hidden sore. Nor is his life cut short, 
when the day of destiny overtakes him, as we 
might say of a tragedian’s part, who leaves the 
stage before finishing his speech and playing out the 
piece? Furthermore there is nothing there slavish 
or affected, no dependence on others or severance 
from them,’ no sense of accountability or skulking to 
avoid it. 

9. Hold sacred thy capacity for forming opinions. 

53 Sen, VQ. vi. 39, ad fin. ὁ xi. ὅδ: Sen, Ey 77. 
+ viii. 34, 


57 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


TO πᾶν, ἵνα ὑπόληψις τῷ ἡγεμονικῷ σου μηκέτι 
ἐγγένηται ἀνακόλουθος τῇ φύσει καὶ τῇ τοῦ 
λογικοῦ ζῴου κατασκευῇ. αὕτη δὲ ἐπαγγέλλεται 
ἀπροπτωσίαν καὶ τὴν πρὸς ἀνθρώπους οἰκείωσιν 
καὶ τὴν τοῖς θεοῖς ἀκολουθίαν. 

ι(. Πάντα οὖν ῥίψας, ταῦτα μόνα τὰ ὀλίγα 
TUVEXE καὶ ἔτι, συμμνὴμόνευε, ὅτι μόνον ζῇ 
ἔκαστος τὸ παρὸν τοῦτο τὸ ἀκαριαῖον: τὰ δὲ 
ἄλλα ἢ βεβίωται ἢ ἐν ἀδήλῳ. μικρὸν μὲν οὖν ὃ 
ζῇ ἕκαστος, μικρὸν δὲ τὸ τῆς γῆς γωνίδιον ὅπου 
on μικρὸν δὲ καὶ ἡ μηκίστη ὑστεροφημία, καὶ 
αὕτη δὲ κατὰ διαδοχὴν ἀνθρωπαρίων τάχιστα 
τεθνηξομένων καὶ οὐκ εἰδότων οὐδὲ ἑαυτούς, οὔτιγε 
τὸν πρόπαλαι τεθνηκότα. 

ια΄. Tots δὲ εἰρημένοις παραστήμασιν ὃν ἔτι 
προσέστω, τὸ ὅρον ἢ ὑπογραφὴν ἀεὶ ποιεῖσθαι 
τοῦ ὑποπίπτοντος φανταστοῦ, ὥστε αὐτὸ ὁποῖόν 
ἐστι κατ᾽ οὐσίαν γυμνὸν ὅλον δι᾿ ὅλων διῃρη- 
μένως βλέπειν, καὶ τὸ ἴδιον ὄνομα αὐτοῦ καὶ τὰ 
ὀνόματα ἐκείνων, ἐξ ὧν συνεκρίθη καὶ εἰς ἃ 
ἀναλυθήσεται, λέγειν παρ᾽ ἑαυτῷ. 

Οὐδὲν γὰρ οὕτως μεγαλοφροσύνης ποιητικόν, 
ὡς τὸ ἐλέγχειν ὁδῷ καὶ ἀληθείᾳ ἕκαστον τῶν 
«ἐν» τῷ βίῳ ὑποπιπτόντων δύνασθαι καὶ τὸ ἀεὶ 
οὕτως εἰς αὐτὰ ὁρᾶν, ὥστε συνεπιβάλλειν, ὁποίῳ 
τινὶ τῷ κόσμῳ ὁποίαν τινὰ τοῦτο χρείαν παρεχ- 
ὀμενον τίνα μὲν ἔχει ἀξίαν ὡς πρὸς τὸ ὅλον, τίνα 
δὲ ὡς πρὸς τὸν ἄνθρωπον, πτολίτην ὄντα πόλεως 
τῆς ἀνωτάτης, ἧς αἱ λοιπαὶ πόλεις ὥσπερ οἰκίαι 
εἰσίν: τί ἐστί, καὶ ἐκ τίνων συγκέκριται, καὶ 

lou 14, 2 iv. 3,§3; vu. 9], 
3 xn. 10. 18. 
58 


BOOK Τῇ 


With that it rests wholly that thy ruling Reason 
should never admit any opmion out of harmony 
with Nature, and with the constitution of a rational 
creature. This ensures due deliberation and fellowship 
with mankind and fealty to the Gods. 

10. Jettison everything else, then, and lay hold 
of these things only, few as they are; and remember 
withal that it is only this present,! a moment of 
time, that a man lives: all the rest either has been 
lived or may never he. Little indeed, then, is 
a man’s life, and little the nook of earth 2? whereon 
he lives, and little even the longest after-fame, 
and that too handed on through ἃ succession of 
manikins, each one of them very soon to be dead, 
with no knowledge even of themselves, let alone 
of a man who has died long since. 

11. To the stand-bys mentioned add one more, 
that a definition or delineation should be made of 
every object that presents itself, so that we may 
see what sort of "thing it is in its essence® stripped 
of its adjuncts, a separate whole taken as such, 
and tell over with ourselves both its particular 
designation and the names of the elements that 
compose it and into which it will be disintegrated. 

For nothing is so conducive to greatness of mind 
as the ability to examine systematically and honestly 
everything that meets us in life, and to regard 
these things always in such a way as to form a 
conception of the kind of Universe they belong 
to, and of the use which the thing in question 
subserves in it; what value it has for the whole 
Universe and what for man, citizen as he is of 
the highest state, of which all other states are 
but as households; what it actually is, and com- 


59 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


, / , / ω \ 
πόσον χρόνον πέφυκε παραμένειν τοῦτο, TO τὴν 
7 “A “ A [ον 
φαντασίαν μοι νῦν ποιοῦν" καὶ τίνος ἀρετῆς πρὸς 

ν 7 χω / / 
αὐτὸ χρεία, οἷον ἡμερότητος, ἀνδρείας, ἀληθείας, 
’ὔ 7 al “A 
πίστεως, ἀφελείας, αὐταρκείας, τῶν λοιπῶν. 
Ν “ 3 9 ¢ / 7 “ \ \ 
Διὸ δεῖ ἐφ᾽ ἑκώστου λέγειν, τοῦτο μὲν παρὰ 
θ ~ ef “ \ \ \ ΄ \ Ἀ 
εοῦ KEL’ τοῦτο δὲ κατὰ τὴν σύλληξιν καὶ τὴν 
7 7 Ν 
συμμηρυνομένην σύγκλωσιν καὶ τὴν τοιαύτην 
΄ / 4 ω \ a 
σύντευξίν τε Kal τύχην: τοῦτο δὲ παρὰ τοῦ 
, \ “ a a 
συμφύλου καὶ συγγενοῦς καὶ κοινωνοῦ, ἀγνοοῦντος 
/ ο᾽ 3 ἰοὺ \ ΄ 3 / % > 4 \ » 
μέντοι ὃ τι αὐτῷ κατὰ φύσιν ἐστίν. ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ οὐκ 
9 ΩΝ Ἁ κ᾿ ral 2 n \ \ A 
ἀγνοῶ" διὰ τοῦτο χρῶμαι αὐτῷ κατὰ τὸν τῆς 
” , / 
κοιωνίας φυσικὸν νόμον εὔνως καὶ δικαίως: ἅμα 
n b ] ? ἴω 
μέντοι τοῦ KAT ἀξίαν ἐν τοῖς μέσοις συστοχάξομαι. 
> \ \ Ν ων “ 
iB. “Kav τὸ παρὸν ἐνεργῇς ἑπόμενος τῷ 
᾿] ΠῚ 7 7 fal 
ὀρθῷ λόγῳ ἐσπουδασμένως, ἐρρωμένως, εὐμενῶς, 
\ Ν ‘ y \ Ἂν nw 
καὶ μηδὲν παρεμπόρευμα, ἀλλὰ τὸν ἑαυτοῦ 
/ \ a n ς 
δαίμονα καθαρὸν ἑστῶτα τηρῆς, ὡς εἰ καὶ ἤδη 
“ f \ a \ 
ἀποδοῦναι δέοι: ἐὰν τοῦτο συνάπτῃς μηδὲν περι- 
, \ , ’ \ ‘os ’ \ 
μένων μηδὲ φεύγων, ἀλλὰ TH παρούσῃ κατὰ 
7 2 , \ “Ἢ « “ \ , 
φύσιν ἐνεργείᾳ καὶ τῇ, ὧν λέγεις καὶ φθέγγῃ, 
e ov a) 3 / }] 4 ” / » \ 
ἡρωϊκῇ ἀληθείᾳ ἀρκούμενος, evSwraes. ἔστι δὲ 
sf ω ων ‘4 
οὐδεὶς ὁ τοῦτο κωλῦσαι δυνάμενος. 
/ ᾿ 
iy’. “Ὥσπερ οἱ ἰατροὶ ἀεὶ τὰ ὄργανα καὶ 
/ \ \ ’ / ~ 
σιδήρια πρόχειρα ἔχουσι πρὸς τὰ αἰφνίδια τῶν 
δ ἤ 
θεραπευμάτων, οὕτω τὰ δόγματα σὺ ἕτοιμα ἔχε 
Ἀ Ν Ν Ἂ \ f 0, “ 
πρὸς τὸ τὰ θεῖα καὶ ἀνθρώπινα εἰδέναι, καὶ πᾶν 
I παρεμπορεύῃ Gat.: Perhaps ἐν παρεμπορεύματι. 
Τ᾿ Notice the fondness of Marcus for compounds of συν- and 
his use here of alliteration, cp. xu. 14. 


60 


BOOK ΠῚ 


pounded of what clements, and likely to last how 
long—namely this that now gives me the impression 
in question; and what virtue it calls for from me, 
such as gentleness, manly courage, truth, fidelity, 
guilelessness, frugality, and the rest. 

In each case therefore must thou say: This has 
come from God; and this is due to the conjunction of 
fate and the contexture of the world’s web and some such 
comcidence and chance ;+ while that comes from a clans- 
man and a kinsman and a fellow, albeit one who ts 
ignorant of what 2s really in accordance with has nature. 
But L am not ignorant, therefore 1 treat him kindly and 
justly, im acco) dance with the natural law of neighbour- 
liness ; at the same time, of things that are neither good 
nor bad, my aim is to hit their true worth. 

12. If in obedience to right reason thou doest the 
thing that thy hand findeth to do earnestly, 
manfully, graciously, and in no sense as a by-work,? 
and keepest that divine ‘genius’? of thine in its 
virgin state, just as if even now thou wert called 
upon to restore it to the Giver—if thou grapple this 
to thee, looking for nothing, shrinking from nothing, 
but content with a present sphere of activity such as 
Nature allows, and with old-world truth in every 
word and utterance of thy tongue, thou shalt be 
happy in thy life. And there is no one that is able 
to prevent this. 

13. Just as physicians always keep their lancets 
and instruments ready to their hands for emergency 
operations, so also do thou keep thine axioms ready 
for the diagnosis of things human and divine, and 


: cp. Dio 71. 6, § 2 (of Marcus), οὐδὲν ἐν παρέργῳ οὔτε ἔλεγεν 
οὔτε ἔγραψεν οὔτε ἐποίει. 
ὁ it. 6, § 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


καὶ τὸ μικρότατον οὕτω ποιεῖν, ὡς τῆς ἀμφοτέρων 
πρὸς ἄλληλα συνδέσεως μεμνημένον. οὔτε yap 
ἀνθρώπινόν τι ἄνευ τῆς ἐπὶ τὰ θεῖα συναναφορῶς 
εὖ πράξεις οὔτε ἐμπαλιν. 

to. Μηκέτι πλανῶ' οὔτε γὰρ τὰ ὑπομνημάτιά 
σου μέλλεις ἀναγινώσκειν, οὔτε τὰς τῶν ἀρχαίων 
“Ρωμαίων καὶ ᾿Ιλλήνων πράξεις, καὶ τὰς ἐκ τῶν 
συγγραμμάτων ἐκχογώς, ἃς εἰς τὸ γῆρας σαυτῷ 
ἀπετίθεσο. σπεῦδε οὖν εἰς τέλος," καὶ τὰς κενὰς 
ἐλπίδας ἀφεὶς σαυτῷ βοήθει, εἴ τί σοι μέλει 
σεαυτοῦ, ἕως ἔξεστιν. 

ιε΄. Οὐκ ἴσασι πόσα σημαίνει τὸ κλέπτειν," τὸ 
σπείρειν, τὸ ὠνεῖσθαι," τὸ ἡσυχάζειν, τὸ ὁρᾶν τὰ 
πρακτέα, ὃ οὐκ ὀφθαλμοῖς γίνεται ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέρᾳ 
τινὶ ὄψει. 

ις΄. Σῶμα, ψυχή, νοῦς" σώματος αἰσθήσεις, 
ψυχῆς ὁρμαί, νοῦ δόγματα. τὸ μὲν τυποῦσθαι 
φανταστικῶς καὶ τῶν βοσκημάτων, τὸ δὲ 
νευροσπαστεῖσθαι ὁρμητικῶς καὶ τῶν θηρίων 
καὶ τῶν ἀνδρογύνων καὶ Φαλάριδος καὶ Νέρ- 
ὠνος" τὸ δὲ τὸν νοῦν ἡγεμόνα ἔχειν ἐπὶ τὰ 
φαινόμενα καθήκοντα, καὶ τῶν θεοὺς μη νομιζόν- 
TOV καὶ τῶν τὴν πατρίδα ἐγκαταλειπόντων καὶ 
τῶν «πᾶν ποιούντων, ἐπειδὰν κλείσωσι τὰς 
θύρας. 

\ δ 


a iy Ν \ Ν 3 f 
Ku οὖν Ta λοιπὰ " κοινά ἐστι πρὸς τὰ εἰρημένα, 


1 εἰς τέλος P: εἰ θέλεις AC. 

2 σκάπτειν ““ἴο delve” Polak. ὁ κινεῖσθαι Richards 

4 ἂν:» Cor 5 Por χὺ 1 ld prefer ~ 
<Tayv-> Cor. ΟΥ τὰ λοιπὰ ἃ WOU preter τοιαῦτα 


1 je the human and the divine 
* [Ὁ 15 not clear whether Marcus refers to the present bouk. 
He uses a similar word for the discourses of Epictetus (1. 7). 


62 


BOOK IT] 


for the performing of every act, even the pettiest, 
with the fullest consciousness of the mutual ties 
between these two.) For thou shalt never carry out 
well any human duty unless thou correlate it to the 
divine, nor the reverse. 

14. Go astray no more; for thou art not likely to 
read thy little Memoranda,? or the Acts of the Romans 
and the Greeks of Old Time,’ and the extracts‘ from 
their writings which thou wast laying up against 
thine old age. Haste then tothe consummation and, 
casting away all empty hopes, if thou carest aught 
for thy welfare, come to thine own rescue, while it 
is allowed thee. 

15. They know not how full of meaning are—-to 
thieve,® to sow, to buy, to be at peace, to see what 
needs doing, and this is not a matter for the eye but 
for another sort of sight. 

16. Body, Soul, dntelligence: for the body sens- 
ations, for the soul desires, for the intelligence axioms. 
To receive impressions by way of the senses is not 
denied even to cattle ; to be as puppets® pulled by 
the strings of desire is common to wild beasts and to 
pathics and to a Phalaris and a Nero. Yet to have 
the intelligence a guide to what they deem their 
duty is an attribute of those also who do not believe 
in Gods and those who fail their country in its need 
and those who do their deeds behind closed doors.” 

If then all else is the common property of the 


3 ii, 2, Some have seen here a reference to a history written 
by Marcus himself 

4 See Fronto, ad Caes. ii 10, excerpta ex libris sexcagintu 
n quingue tomas. 5 xi 3. "Στ᾿ 

7 Must undoubtedly refer tu the Christians, who were 
accused precisely of these three things—atheism, want of 
patriotism, and secret orgies. cp. also, 1. 6; vil. 68, vill 
48, 51; and see note pp. 381 ἢ 


63 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


λοιπὸν τὸ ἴδιόν ἐστι τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ φιλεῖν 
μὲν καὶ ἀσπάξεσθαι τὰ συμβαίνοντα καὶ ouy- 
κλωθύμενα αὐτῷ. τὸν δὲ ἔνδον ἐν τῷ στήθει 
ἱδρυμένον δαίμονα μὴ φύρειν μηδὲ θορυβεῖν ὄχλῳ 
φαντασιῶν, ἀλλὰ ἴλεων διατηρεῖν, κοσμίως ἐπτό- 
μενον θεῷ, μήτε φθεγγόμενόν τι παρὰ τὰ ἀληθῆ 
μήτε ἐνεργοῦντα παρὰ τὰ δίκαια. εἰ δὲ ἀπιστοῦ- 
σιν αὐτῷ πώντες ἄνθρωποι, ὃ ὅτι ἁπλῶς καὶ αἰδημ- 
όνως καὶ “εὐθύμως βιοῖ, οὔτε χαλεπαίνει τινὶ 
τούτων, οὔτε TAPATPETETAL τῆς ὁδοῦ τῆς ἀγούσης 
ἐπὶ τὸ τέλος τοῦ βίου, ἐφ᾽ ὃ δεῖ ἐλθεῖν καθαρόν, 
ἡσύχιον, εὔλυτον, ἀβιάστως τῇ ἑαυτοῦ μοίρᾳ 
συνηρμοσμένον. 


BOOK ΠῚ 


classes mentioned, there is left as the characteristic 
of the good man to delight in and to welcome what 
befalls and what is spun for him by destiny; and not 
to sully the divine ‘ genius’ that is enthroned in his 
bosom,! nor yet to perplex it with a multitude of 
impressions, but to maintain it to the end ina gracious 
serenity, in orderly obedience to God, uttering no 
word that is not true and doing no deed that is not 
just. But if all men disbelieve in his living a simple 
and modest and cheerful life, he is not wroth with 
any of them, nor swerves from the path which leads 
to his life’s goal, whither he must go pure, peaceful, 
ready for release, needing no force to bring him 
into accord with his lot. 
1 ii. 6, ὃ 2; St. Panl, 1 Cor, m1. 16. 


65 


F 


BIBAION A 


α΄. To ἔνδον κυριεῦον, ὅταν κατὰ φύσιν ἔχῃ, 
οὕτως ἕστηκε πρὸς τὰ συμβαίνοντα, ὥστε ἀεὶ 
πρὸς τὸ δυνατὸν καὶ διδόμενον μετατίθεσθαι 
ῥᾳδίως. ὕλην γὰρ ἀποτεταγμένην οὐδεμίαν φιλεῖ, 
ἀλλὰ ὁρμᾷ μὲν πρὸς τὰ «προηγούμενα | μεθ᾽ 
ὑπεξαιρέσεως" τὸ δὲ ἀντεισαγόμενον ὕλην ἑαυτῷ 
ποιεῖ, ὥσπερ τὸ πῦρ, ὅταν ἐπικρατῇ τῶν ἐπεμ- 
πιπτόντων, ὑφ᾽ ὧν ἂν μικρός τις λύχνος ἐσβέσθη" 
τὸ δὲ λαμπρὸν πῦρ τάχιστα ἐξῳκείωσεν ἑαυτῷ 
τὰ ἐπιφορούμενα καὶ κατηνάλωσεν καὶ ἐξ αὐτῶν 
ἐκείνων ἐπὶ μεῖζον ἤρθη. 

β΄. Μηδὲν é ἐνέργημα εἰκῇ μηδὲ ἄλλως ἢ κατὰ 
θεώρημα συμπληρωτικὸν τῆς τέχνης ἐνεργείσθω' 

γ΄. ᾿Αναχωρήσεις αὑτοῖς ζητοῦσιν, ὠγροικίας 
καὶ αἰγιαλοὺς καὶ ὄρη" εἴωθας δὲ καὶ σὺ τὰ τοιαῦτα 
μάλιστα ποθεῖν. ὅλον δὲ τοῦτο ἰδιωτικώτατόν 
ἐστιν, ἐξὸν ἧς ἂν ὥρας ἐθελήσης εἰς ἑαυτὸν ἀνα- 
χωρεῖν. οὐδαμοῦ γὰρ οὔτε ἡσυχιώτερον οὔτε 


1 <mpo> Gat. 





1 iii. 6, § 2, ete. ep. Lucian, Somn. 10, ἡ ψυχή, ὕπερ cov 
κυριώτατον ἐστιν. 

*4.e, conditionally or as far as circumstances will allow, 
vi, 50 cp. St ὁ Ep. iv. 15 

Ὁ. St James, Ep. iv. 15. 


2 


v.20; vi. 50; Sen. de Prov. 2. 4 ii. 5 ete. 


66 


BOOK IV 


1, Twat which holds the mastery! within us, 
when it is in accordance with Nature, is so disposed 
towards what befails, that it can always adapt itself 
with ease to what is possible and granted us. For it 
is wedded to no definite material, but, though in 
the pursuit of its high aims it works under reser- 
vations,” yet it convérts into material for itself any 
obstacle that it meets with, just as fire ? when it gets 
the mastery of what is thrown in upon it. A little 
flame would have been stifled by it, but the blazing 
fre instantly assimilates what is cast upon it and, 
consuming it, leaps the higher in consequence. 

2. Take no act in hand aimlessly? or otherwise 
than in accordance with the true principles perfective 
of the art. 

3. Men seek out retreats for themselves in the 
country, by the seaside, on the mountains, and thou 
too art wont to long intensely for such things. But 
all this is unphilosophical to the last degree, when 
thou canst at a moment’s notice retire into thyself.® 
For nowhere can a man find a retreat more full ΟἹ 


δ eg. Lonum, Lanuvium, Alsium, Centumcellae, Praeneste, 
Baiae, Caieta, all holiday resorts of Marcus, see especially 
Fronto de Fer, Als. Nab. p. 223 ff cp. x. 15, 23. 

® ¢o Arethas on Dio Chrys. xx. 8, μὴ οὖν βελτίστη καὶ 
λυσιτελεστάτη πασῶν ἡ eis αὑτὸν ἀναχώρησις. See below 


iv. 3, ὃ 4; vil. 28. 67 
Ε9 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


δ / f a oN 
ἀπραγμονέστερον ἄνθρωπος ἀναχωρεῖ i) εἰς THY 
ἑαυτοῦ ψυχὴν" μάλισθ᾽ ὅστις ἔγει ἔνδον τοιαῦτα, 


,. - 3 ἃ b] ΄ 3 7 > , + \ ᾽ 
εἰς ἃ ἐγκύψας ἐν πάσῃ εὐμαρείᾳ εὐθὺς γίνεται" 


\ Ν 3 ΄ ἠδὲ Μ f δ 2 7 
τὴν δὲ εὐμάρειαν οὐδὲν ἄλλο λέγω ἢ εὐκοσμίαν. 
la 4 fa \ 
συνεχῶς οὖν δίδου σεαυτῷ ταύτην τὴν ἀναχώρ- 
now, καὶ ἀνανέου σεαυτόν: βραχέα δὲ ἔστω 
καὶ στοιχειώδη, ἃ εὐθὺς ἀπαντήσαντα ἀρκέσει 
an 7 
εἰς τὸ πᾶσαν taviay ἀποκλύσαινϊ,, καὶ ἀπο- 
A \ ΄ 3 / 79> A 
πέμψαι σε μὴ δυσχεραίνοντα ἐκείνοις, ἐφ᾽ ἃ 
/ 
ἐπανέρχῃ. 
/ \ ,ὔ fo ἴω 
Τίνι γὰρ δυσχεραίνεις; τῇ τῶν ἀνθρώπων κακίᾳ; 
f ‘ a ἰς \ ca 
ἀναλογισάμενος TO κρῖμα, ὅτι τὰ λογικὰ Coa 
3 / ΦὩ f \ a \ > / 
ἀλλήλων ἕνεκεν γέγονε, Kal ὅτι τὸ ἀνέχεσθαι, 
μέρος τῆς δικαιοσύνης, καὶ ὅτε ἄκοντες ἁμαρτάν- 
Ν 7 
ουσι, καὶ πόσοι ἤδη διεχθρεύσαντες, ὑποπτεύ- 
f 
σαντες, μισήσαντες, διαδορατισθέντες ἐκτέτανται, 
΄ ἴω ΄ι 
τετέφρωνται, παύου ποτέ. ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς ἐκ τῶν 
7 7 
ὅλων ἀὠπονεμομένοις δυσχεραίνεις; ἀνανεωσ ά- 
Ν f 5 3 
μενος TO διεζευγμένον" ‘Hoe πρόνοια, ἢ ἄτομοι," 
7 t 
καὶ ἐξ ὅσων ἀπεδείχθη, ὅτε ὁ κόσμος ὡσανεὶ 
f 2 \ Ν ,ὔ Ψ yy 
πόλις. ἀλλὰ τὼ σωματικὰ σου ἅψεται ἔτι; 
΄ δ “ Σ 
ἐννοήσας ὅτι οὐκ ἐπιμίγνυται λείως ἢ τραχέως 
, 
κινουμένῳ πνεύματι ἡ διάνοια, ἐπειδὰν ἅπαξ 
ς \ > f \ / \ >? ? , 
ἑαυτὴν ἀπολάβῃ καὶ γνωρίσῃ τὴν ἰδίαν ἐξουσίαν' 
\ ld κι 
καὶ λοιπὸν ὅσα περὶ πόνου καὶ ἡδονῆς ἀκήκοας 
\ 7 
καὶ συγκατέθου. 
/ 
᾿Αλλὰ τὸ δοξάριόν σε περισπάσει; ἀπιδὼν εἰς 
a / \ a ? 
TO τάχος τῆς πάντων λήθης, καὶ TO χάος TOD ἐφ 
1 πᾶσαν αὐτὴν ἀποκλύσαι PC: ἀποκλεῖσαι Al): λύπην Reiske, 


ἀνίαν Gat., αὐλήν Lofft. Many accept the last, but it does 
not suit the next clause aud would also require <thy> 





1 For ἐγκύψας ep. St. James, Ep. i. 25, παρακύψας. 
2 vil, 22, 63 χι. 18, ὃ ὃ. eM. 1s 3 1X. 285-39. 


68 


BOOK IV 


peace or more free from care than his own soul— 
above all if he have that within him, a steadfast 
look } at which and he is at once in al] good ease, 
and by good ease I mean nothing other than good 
order. Make use then of this retirement continually 
and regenerate thyself. Let thy axioms be short 
and elemental, such as, when set before thee, will 
at once rid thee of all trouble, and send thee away 
with no discontent at those things to which thou art 
returning. 

For with what art thou discontented? The 
wickedness of men? Take this conclusion to heart, 
that rational creatures have been made for one 
another; that forbearance is part of justice; that 
wreng-doing 15 involuntary;? and think how many 
ere now, after passing their lives in implacable 
enmity, suspicion, hatred, and at daggers drawn 
with one another, have been laid out and burnt to 
ashes—think of this, I say, and at last stay thy 
fretting. But art thou discontented with thy share 
in the whole? Recall the alternative: Luther 
Providence or Aloms!/*? and the abundant proofs 
there are that the Universe is as it were a state.* 
But is it the affections of the body that shall still 
lay hold on thee? Bethink thee that the Intelli- 
gence, when it has once abstracted itself and learnt 
its own power,’ has nothing to do with the motions 
smooth or rough of the vital breath. Bethink thee 
too of all that thou hast heard and subscribed to 
about pleasure and pain. 

But will that paltry thing, Fame, pluck thee aside? 
Look at the swift approach of complete forgetfulness, 


LGi.16 ad fin.; 1v. 4; x. 15; xii. 36. St. Paul, Philip- 
pians 11. 20. ὅν, 14. 
69 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἑκάτερα ἀπείρου αἰῶνος, καὶ τὸ κενὸν τῆς 
ἀπηχήσεως, καὶ τὸ εὐμετάβολον καὶ ἄκριτον 
τῶν εὐφημεῖν ' δοκούντων, καὶ τὸ στενὸν τοῦ 
τόπου, ἐν ᾧ περιγράφεται. ὅλη τε γὰρ ἡ γῆ 
στυγμή, καὶ ταύτης πόστον γωνίδιον ἡ κατοίκησις 
αὕτη; καὶ ἐνταῦθα πόσον καὶ οἷοί τινες οἱ 
ἐπαινεσόμενοι; 

Λοιπὸν οὖν μέμνησο, τῆς ᾿ὑποχωρήσεως τῆς 
εἰς τοῦτο τὸ ἀγρίδιον ἑαυτοῦ" καὶ πρὸ παντὸς 
μὴ. σπῶ μηδὲ κατεντείνοιι, ἀλλὰ ἐλεύθερος ἔσο 
καὶ ὅρα τὰ πράγματα ὡς ἀνήρ, ὡς ἄνθρωπος, 
ὡς πολίτης, ὡς θνητὸν ζῷον. ἐν δὲ τοῖς 
προχειροτάτοις, εἰς ἃ ἐγκύψεις, ταῦτα ἔστω 
τὰ δύο. ὃν μέν, ὅτι τὰ πράγματα οὐχ 
ἅπτεται τῆς ψυχῆς, ἀλλ᾽ ἔξω ,ἕστηκεν ἀτρεμ- 
οὔντα' at δὲ ὀχλήσεις ἐκ μόνης τῆς ἔνδον 
ὑπολήψεως. ἕτερον δέ, ὅτι πάντα ταῦτα ὅσα 
ὁρᾷς ὅσον οὐδέπω μεταβάλλει, καὶ οὐκ ἔτι 
ἔσται" καὶ ὅσων ἤδη μεταβολαῖς αὐτὸς παρα- 
τετύχηκας, “συνεχῶς διανοοῦ. “ὁ κόσμος, 
ὠλλοίωσις" ὁ βίος, ὑπόληψις." 

δ, Ei τὸ νοερὸν ἡμῖν κοινόν, καὶ ὁ λόγος, καθ᾽ 
ὃν λογικοί ἐσμεν, κοινός" εἰ τοῦτο, καὶ ὁ προσ- 
τακτικὸς τῶν ποιητέων ἢ μὴ λόγος κοινός" εἰ 
τοῦτο, καὶ ὁ νόμος κοινός" εἰ τοῦτο, πολῖταί ἐσμεν' 
εἰ τοῦτο, πολιτεύματός τινος μετέχομεν" εἰ τοῦτο, 
ὁ κόσμος ὡσανεὶ πόλις ἐστί. τίνος γὰρ ἄλλου 

1 ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν PADC: εὐφημεῖν Gat.: perhaps ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν 
εὐφημεῖν, 

“fi. 10; vii. 21. 


241.155 iv. 7; x1i.22 A maxim of Democrates, a Pytha- 
gorean; cp. Shak. /Tam/et ii. 2. 256, ‘* There 1s nothing 


either good or bad but thinking makes it so” ; ‘Tennyson 


70 


anteater et eR Rat ams il 


BOOK IV 


and the void of infinite time on this side of us and on 
that, and the empty echo of acclamation, and the 
fickleness and uncritical judgment of those who 
claim to speak well of us, and the narrowness of the 
arena to which all this is confined. For the whole 
earth 1s but a point, and how tiny a corner! of it 
is this the place of our sojourning! and how many 
therein and of what sort are the men who shall praise 
thee! 

From now therefore bethink thee of the retreat into 
this little plot that is thyself. Above all distract 
not thyscif, be not too eager, but be thine own 
master, and look upon life as a man, as a human 
being, as a citizen, as a mortal creature. But 
among the principles readiest to thine hand, upon 
which thou shalt pore, let there be these two. One, 
that objective things do not lay hold of the soul, but 
stand quiescent without ; while disturbances are but 
the outcome of that opinion which is within us. A 
second, that all this visible world changes in a 
moment, and will be no more; and continually be- 
think thee to the changes of how many things thou 
hast already been a witness. ‘The Universe—muta- 
tion: Life—opinion.’? 

4. If the intellectual capacity is common to us all, 
common too is the reason, which makes us rational 
creatures. If so, that reason also is common which 
tells us to do or not to do. If so, law? also is 
common. If so, we are citizens. If so, we are 
fellow-inembers of an organised community. If so, 
the Universe is as it were a state *—for of what 
“ΑἹ! things are, as they seem, to all.” Some have been found 


to say that even matter has no objective existence. 
3 vu. 9. ep. Aur, Viet. ρὲ! xvi. 4, Munda lex seu Natura. 


4 ov. 5. δῦ, 


71 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


φήσει τις TO τῶν ἀνθρώπων πᾶν γένος κοινοῦ 
πολιτεύματος μετέχειν; ἐκεῖθεν δέ, ἐ ἐκ τῆς κοινῆς 
ταύτης πόλεως, καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ “νοερὸν καὶ λογικὸν 
καὶ νομικὸν ἡμῖν' ἢ πόθεν; ὥσπερ γὰρ τὸ γεῶδές 
μοι ἀπὸ τινος γῆς ἀπομεμέρισται, καὶ τὸ ὑγρὸν 
ἀφ᾽ ἑτέρου στοιχείου καὶ τὸ πνευματικὸν ὠπὸ 
πηγῆς τινὸς καὶ τὸ θερμὸν καὶ πυρῶδες ἔ ἔκ τινος 
ἰδίας πηγῆς (οὐδὲν γὰρ ἐκ τοῦ μηδενὸς ἐ ἔρχεται, 
ὥσπερ μηδ᾽ εἰς τὸ οὐκ ὃν ἀπέρχεται), οὕτω δὴ 
καὶ τὸ νοερὸν ἥκει ποθέν. 

ε. Ὁ θάνατος τοιοῦτος, οἷον γένεσις, φύσεως 
μυστήριον, σύγκρισις ἐκ τῶν αὐτῶν στοιχείων, 
«διάκρισις!» " εἰς ταὐτά' ὅλως δὲ οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ᾧ ἂν τις 
αἰσχυνθείη" οὐ γὰρ παρὰ τὸ ἑξῆς τῷ νοερῷ ζῴῳ 
οὐδὲ 7 παρὰ τὸν λόγον τῆς παρασκευῆς." 

ς΄, Ταῦτα οὕτως ὑπὸ τῶν τοιούτων. πέφυκε 
γίνεσθαι ἐξ ἀνάγκης" ὁ δὲ τοῦτο μὴ θέλων 
θέλει τὴν συκῆν ὀπὸν μὴ ἔχειν. ὅλως δ᾽ ἐκεῖνο 
μέμνησο, ὅτι ἐντὸς ὀλυγίστου χρόνου καὶ σὺ καὶ 
οὗτος τεθνήξεσθε: μετὰ βραχὺ δὲ οὐδὲ ὄνομα 
ὑμῶν ὑπολειφθήσεται. 

τ ~Apov τὴν ὑπόληψιν, ἢ ἦρται τὸ βέβλαμμαι:" 
ἄρον τὸ “ βέβλαμμαι," ἦρται ἡ βλάβη. 

η΄. Ὃ χείρω αὐτὸν ἑαυτοῦ ἄνθρωπον οὐ ποιεῖ, 
τοῦτο οὐδὲ τὸν βίον αὐτοῦ χείρω ποιεῖ, οὐδὲ 
βλάπτει οὔτε ἔξωθεν οὔτε ἔνδοθεν. 

θ΄. ᾿Ηνάγκασται ἡ τοῦ συμφέροντος φύσις 
τοῦτο “ποιεῖν. 


1 πηγῆς PC + γῆς AD: πνοῆς Schenkl. ~ < διάκρισι5 > ΟΥ̓ 
« διάλυσις -- Gat. * We should expect κατασκεύης. 


1 Lit. the pheumane, here = τὸ ἀερῶδες (χ 7, 82). 
2 vii, 64. ae eae 


BOOK IV 


other single polity can the whole race of mankind 
be said to he fellow-members?—-and from it, this 
common State, we get the intellectual, the rational, 
and the legal instinct, or whence do we get them? 
For just as the earthy part has been portioned 
off for me from some earth, and the watery from 
another element, and the aerial! from some source, 
and the hot and fiery from some source of its 
own—for nothing comes from the non-existent, any 
more than it disappears into nothingness—so also the 
intellect has undoubtedly come from somewhere. 

5. Death like birth is a secret of Nature—a com- 
bination of the same elements, a breaking up into 
the same—and uot at all a thing in fact for any to be 
ashamed of,? for it is not out of keeping with an 
intellectual creature or the reason of his con- 
stitution. 

6. Given such men, it was in the nature of the 
case inevitable that their conduct should be of this 
kind. To wish it otherwise, is to wish that the fig- 
tree had no acrid juice.t| As a general conclusion 
eall this to mind, that within a very short time both 
thou and he will be dead, and a little later not 
even your names will be left behind you. 

7. Efface the opinion, J am harmed, and at once 
the feeling of being harmed disappears ; efface the 
feeling, and the harm disappears at once.° 

8. That which does not make a man_ himself 
worse than before cannot make his life worse ὃ 
either, nor injure it whether from without or within. 

9. The nature of the general good could not but 
have acted so. 


4 xii. 16. cp. Bacon, On Revenye. 
ὅν, 3, 8 43; vil. 14,29; 1x. 7; xi 25. 8 ai. 1]; vi. 64. 


73 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


/ 


ef a Ν tal , 
te. “Ore πᾶν τὸ συμβαῖνον δικαίως συμβαίνει: 
ὅ, ἐὰν ἀκριβῶς “παραφυλάσσῃς, εὑρήσεις" οὐ 
λέγω μόνον κατὰ τὸ ἑξῆς, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι κατὰ τὸ 
δίκαιον καὶ ὡς ἂν ὑπὸ τίνος ἀπονέμοντος τὸ κατ᾽ 
ἀξίαν. παραφύλασσε οὖν, ὡς ἤρξω' Kal, ὅ τι 
ἂν ποιῇς, σὺν τούτῳ ποίει, σὺν τῷ ἀγαθὸς εἶναι, 
καθ᾽ ὃ νενόηται ἰδία, ὦ ὁ ὡὠγαθός. τοῦτο ἐπὶ πάσης 
7 va 
ἐνεργείας ae. 
ια΄. Μὴ τοιαῦτα ὑπολάμβανε, οἷα ὁ ὑβρίζων 
x er , / 3 > ) f 
κρίνει ἢ οἷά oe κρίνειν βούλεται" ἀλλ᾽ ἴδε αὐτά, 
ὁποῖα κατ᾽ ἀλήθειάν ἐστιν. 
t ’ ΄ ¢ / ” x, \ ἴων 
ιβ΄. Δύο ταύτας ἑτοιμότητας ἔχειν ἀεὶ δεῖ" 
\ “ Ν \ m™ ¢ , 3 A 
τὴν μέν, πρὸς TO πρᾶξαι μόνον, ὅπερ ἂν ὁ τῆς 
βασιλικῆς καὶ νομοθετικῆς λόγος ὑποβάλλῃ, ἐπ᾽ 
ὠφελείᾳ ἀνθρώπων' τὴν δέ, πρὸς τὸ μεταθέσθαι, 
ἐὰν ἄρα τις παρῇ διορθῶν καὶ μετάγων ἀπὸ τινος 
\ / 
οἰήσεως. τὴν μέντοι μεταγωγὴν ἀεὶ ἀπὸ τινος 
’ ,ὔ 3 al 
πιθανότητος ws δικαίου ἢ κοινωφελοῦς γίνεσθαι, 
Ν ω / > κ᾿ 
καὶ Ta παραπλήσιατ" τοιαῦτα μόνον εἶναι δεῖ, 
οὐχ ὅτι ἡδὺ ἡ ἢ ἔνδοξον ἐφάνη. 
try. Λόγον. ἔχεις; “ ἔχω." τί οὖν οὐ χρᾷ; 
τούτου γὰρ τὸ ἑαυτοῦ ποιοῦντος τί ἄλλο θέλεις; 
ιδ΄. ᾿νυπέστης ὡς μέρος. ἐναφανισθήσῃ τῷ 
A ἴω δὲ bf] θ , 4 ὡ τς 
γεννήσαντι' μᾶλλον ὃὲ ἀναληφθησῃ εἰς τὸν 
“A Ν 
λόγον αὐτοῦ τὸν σπερματικὸν κατὰ μεταβολήν. 
te. Πολλὰ λιβανωτοῦ βωλάρια ἐπὶ τοῦ 
αὐτοῦ βωμοῦ: τὸ μὲν προκατέπεσεν, τὸ δὲ 
e / ᾽ 3 / 
ὕστερον" διαφέρει δ᾽ οὐδέν. 


1 παραπαίονα A. 





1 x, 25. 7p. Capit. xxii. 4. 
δ νη, 733 ux. ad fin, ih aes 
5 ‘Phe primal Fire and the eternal Reason are one and the 


74 


BOOK IV 


10. Note that all that befalls befalleth justly. 
Keep close watch and thou wilt find this true, I do 
not say, as a matter of sequence merely but as ἃ 
matter of justice also, and as would be expected 
from One whose dispensation is based on desert.! 
Keep close watch, then, as thou hast begun, and 
whatsoever thou doest, do it as only a good man 
should in the strictest sense of that word. In every 
sphere of activity safeguard this. 

11. Harbour no such opinions as he holds who 
does thee violence, or as he would have thee hold. 
See things in all their naked reality. 

12. Thou shouldest have these two readinesses 
always at hand ; the one which prompts thee to do 
only what thy reason in its royal and law-making 
capacity shall suggest for the good of mankind ; the 
other to change thy mind,? if one be near to set thee 
right, and convert thee from sdme vain conceit 
But this conversion should be the outcome of a 
persuasion in every case that the thing is just or to 
the common interest—and some such cause should 
be the only one—not because 1 is seemingly pleasant 
or popular. 

13. Hast thou reason? f have. Why then not 
use it? For if this performs its part, what else? 
wouldest thou have? 

14. Thou hast subsisted as part of the Whole.‘ 
Thou shalt vanish into that which begat thee, or 
rather thou shalt be taken again into its Seminal 
Reason ® by a process of change. 

15. Many little pellets of frankincense fall upon 
the same altar, some are cast on it sooner, some later : 
but it makes no difference. 
same, and held to contain the seed of all things. cp. Just. 
Apol. τι. 8, 13 for λόγος σπερματικὸς used of Christ. 

75 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


is. Ἔντὸς δέκα ἡμερῶν θεὸς αὐτοῖς δόξεις, 
οἷς νῦν θηρίον Kal πίθηκος, ἐὰν ᾿ἀνακάμψῃς ἐπὶ 
τὰ δόγματα καὶ τὸν σεβασμὸν 7 τοῦ λόγου. 

ιζ. Μὴ ὡς μύρια μέλλων ἔτη ζῆν. τὸ χρεὼν 
ἐπήρτηται" ἕως ζῇς, ἕως ἔξεστιν, ἀγαθὸς γενοῦ)" 

ἢ. “Oony εὐσχολίαν ' κερδαίνει ὁ ὁ μὴ βλέπων 
τί ὁ πλησίον εἶπεν ἢ ἔπραξεν ἢ ἢ διενοήθη, ἀλλὰ 
μόνον τί αὐτὸς ποιεῖ, ἵνα αὐτὸ τοῦτο δίκαιον ἢ 
καὶ ὅσιον" +H? κατὰ τὸν ἀγαθὸν μὴ μέλαν t ἦθος 
περιβλέπεσθαι, ἀλλ᾽ “ἐπὶ τῆς γραμμῆς τρέχειν 
ὀρθὸν, μὴ διερριμμένον." 

ι6. Ὁ περὶ τὴν ὑστεροφημίαν ἐ ἐπτοημένος οὐ 
φαντάζεται, ὅτι éxaoTos τῶν μεμνημένων αὐτοῦ 
τάχιστα καὶ αὐτὸς ὃ ἀποθανεῖται" εἶτα πώλιν 
ἱκα! αὐτὸς] ὁ ἐκεῖνον διαδεξάμενος, μέχρι καὶ 
πᾶσα ἡ μνήμη ἀποσβῇ διὰ ἁπτομένων ὁ καὶ 
σβεννυμένων προϊοῦσα. ὑπόθου δ᾽, ὅτι καὶ 
ἀθάνατοι μὲν οἱ ᾿μεμνησόμενοι, ἀθάνατος δ᾽ ἡ 
μνήμη" τί οὖν τοῦτο πρὸς σέ; καὶ οὐ λέγω, ὅτι 
οὐδὲν πρὸς τὸν τεθνηκότα: ἀλλὰ πρὸς τὸν ζῶντα 
τί ὁ ἔπαινος; πλὴν ἄρα δι’ οἰκονομίαν τιενά' 
παρίῃς f° “γὰρ νῦν ἀκαίρως τὴν φυσικὴν δόσιν, 
a τινὸς ἐχόμενος λόγου λοιπόν. 


1 εὐσχολίαν Gat.: ἀσχολίαν ῬΑ. 
* ἢ Dhave written this for ἢ PA: ᾿Αγαθῶνα Nyl.: δεῖ γὸρ 
τὸν ayaéoy Morus. ἄλλων for μέλαν Stich. Perhaps μέλαν 


<UAAwY >. 3 «- καὶ αὐτὸς P. 
4 ἐπτοημένων PA: ἁπτομένων Schultz. 
ὅ wapins . .. ἐχόμενος Gat.: παρὲς PA: ἐχόμενον P: ἐχο- 


μένην AD. 





: 7» there was a Greck proverb: ἢ θεὸς ἢ θηρίον (Arist. Pol. 

Hih, vu. 1). Plut. Stowe. Parad. speaks of conversion 

Ἢ “yhilosophy from a Onpfor to a θεός. See Justin’s clever 
application of this proverb, Apo/. i. 24, 


76 


BOOK IY 


16. Ere ten days are past, thou shalt rank as a god 
with them that hold thee now a wild-beast or an 
ape,’ if thou but turn back to thy axioms and thy 
reverence of reason. 

17. Behave not as though thou hadst ten thousand 
years to live. Thy doom hangs over thee. While 
thou livest, while thou mayest, become good. 

18. What richness of leisure doth he gain who has 
no eye for his neighbour’s words or deeds or thoughts,? 
but only for his own -doings, that they be just and 
righteous! Verily it is not for the good man to peer 
about into the blackness of another’s heart,®? but to 
‘run straight for the goal with never a glance aside.’ 

19. He whose heart flutters for after-fame+ does 
not reflect that very soon every one of those who 
remember him, and he himself, will be dead, and 
their successors again after them, until at last the 
entire recollection of the man will be extinct, 
handed on as it is by links that flare up and are 
quenched. But put the case that those who are to 
remember are even immortal, and the remembrance 
immortal, what then is that to thee? To the déad 
man, I need scarcely say, the praise is nothing, but 
what is it to the living, except, indeed, in a subsidiary 
way?® For thou dost reject the bounty of nature 
unseasonably in the present, and clingest to what 
others shall say of thee hereafter.’ 


2. 211,4 ad ane. 3 iv. 28. 

44.173 in. 10; vil. 44; x. 84, PAV: Gos 

6 iv. 19, 51; xi 18,§5. The Greek word covers the mean- 
ings expediency, management, or means to an end. We use it 
in a sort of double sense in the expression economy of truth. 

7 Marcus is perhaps finding real fault with himself for 
caring so much what people said of him; see Capit. xx. 3; 
xxix. 5. But the reading is doubtful. 


77 


2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


κ΄. Πᾶν τὸ καὶ ὁπωσοῦν καλὸν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ 
καλόν ἐστι, καὶ ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὸ καταλήγει, οὐκ ἔχον 
μέρος ἑαυτοῦ τὸν ἔπαινον. οὔτε γοῦν χεῖρον ἢ 
κρεῖττον γίνεται τὸ ἐπαινούμενον. τοῦτό φημι 
καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν κοινότερον καλῶν λεγομένων' οἷον 
ἐπὶ τῶν ὑλικῶν καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν τεχνικῶν κατα- 
σκευασμάτων' τό γε δὴ ὁ ὄντως καλὸν τινὸς χρείαν 
ἔχει; οὐ μᾶλλον ἢ νόμος, οὐ μῶχλον ἢ ἀλήθεια, 
οὐ μᾶλλον ἢ εὔνοια, ἢ αἰδώς. τί τούτων διὰ τὸ 
ἐπαινεῖσθαι καλὸν ἐστιν, 1) ψεγόμενον φθείρεται; 
σμαράγδιον γὰρ ἑαυτοῦ χεῖρον γίνεται, ἐὰν μὴ 
ἐπαινῆτ ται; τί δὲ χρυσός, ἐλέφας, πορφύρα, λύρα, 
μαχαίριον, ἀνθύλλιον, δενδρύφιον; ; 

ka. Ke διαμένουσιν αἱ ψυχαί, πῶς αὐτὰς ἐξ 
ἀιδίου χωρεῖ ὃ ἀήρ; Πῶς δὲ ἡ γῆ χωρεῖ τὰ τῶν 
ἐκ τοσούτου αἰῶνος θαπτομένων σώματα; ὥσπερ 
γὰρ ἐνθάδε ἡ τούτων «μετὰ; ποσήν τινα > ἐπι- 
διαμονὴν μεταβολὴ καὶ διάλυσις χώραν ἄλλοις 
νεκροῖς ποιεῖ, οὕτως αἱ εἰς τὸν ἀέρα μεθιστάμεναι 
ψυχαί, ἐπὶ ποσὸν συμμείνασαι, μεταβάλλουσι 
καὶ χέονται καὶ ἐξάπτονται εἰς τὸν τῶν ὅλων 
σπερματικὸν λόγον ἀναλαμβανόμεναι, καὶ τοῦτον 
τὸν τρόπον χώραν ταῖς προσσυνοικιξομέναις 
παρέχουσιν. τοῦτο δ᾽ ἄν τις ἀποκρίναιτο ἐφ᾽ ὑπο- 
θέσει τοῦ τὰς ψυχὰς διαμένειν. 

Χρὴ δὲ μὴ μόνον ἐνθυμεῖσθαι τὸ πλῆθος τῶν 
θαπτομένων οὑτωσὶ σωμάτων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ τῶν 
ἑκάστης ἡμέρας ἐσθιομένων ζῴων ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν τε 


1 πρὸς ἥντινα PA: ἐπὶ ποσὴν Rend.: <pera> Cas. 





1 vit. 15. 2 op Taetz. Chil. vii. 806. 
3 in. 33 vi. 245 vin 32, 50; vin. 25, 58; xn. 5. The Stoic 
doctrine on this point was not very definite, but it was 


78 


BOOK IV 


20. Everything, which has any sort of beauty of its 
own, is beautiful of itself, and looks no further than 
itself, not counting praise as part of itself. For 
indeed that which is praised is made neither better 
nor worse thereby. ‘This is true also of the things 
that in common parlance are called beautiful, such 
as material things and works of art. Does, then, 
the truly beautiful need anything beyond? Nay, 
no more than law, than truth, than kindness, than 
modesty. Which of these owes its beauty to being 
praised, or loses it by being blamed? What! Does 
an emerald! forfeit its excellence by not being 
praised * Does gold, ivory, purple, a lyre, a poniard, 
a Howeret, a shrub? 

21. If souls outlive their bodies, how does the air 
contain them? from times everlasting ? How does 
the earth contain the bodies of those who have 
been buried in it for such endless ages? For just as 
on earth the change of these bodies, ‘after continuance 
for a certain indefinite time, followed by dissolution, 
makes room for other dead bodies, so souls, when 
transferred into the air, after lasting for a certain 
time,® suffer change and are diffused and become 
fire, being taken again into the Seminal Reason of 
the Whole, and so allow room for those that subse- 
quently take up their abode there. This would be 
the answer one would give on the assumption that 
souls outlive their bodies. 

But not only must the multitude of bodies thus 
constantly being buried be taken into account, but 
also that of the creatures devoured daily by ourselves 


mostly held that souls might exist till the next cyclical 
conflagration, when they became merged into the λόγος 
σπερματικός. Marcus wavers in his belief. 


79 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ζῴων. ὅσος yap ἀριθμὸς κατ- 
αναλίσκεται καὶ οὑτωσί πῶς θάπτεται ἐν τοῖς 
τῶν τρεφομένων σώμασι" καὶ ὅμως δέχεται ἢ 
χώρα αὐτὰ διὰ τὰς ἐξαιματώσεις, διὰ τὰς εἰς τ 
ἀερῶδες ἡ ἢ πυρῶδες ἀλλοιώσεις. 

Τίς ἐπὶ τούτου ἡ ἱστορία τῆς ἀληθείας; διαΐρε- 
σις εἰς τὸ ὑλικὸν καὶ εἰς τὸ αἰτιῶδες. 

κβ΄. Μὴ ἀπορρέμβεσθαι' ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ πάσης 
ὁρμῆς τὸ δίκαιον ἀποδιδόναι καὶ ἐπὶ πάσης 
φαντασίας σώζειν τὸ καταληπτικόν. 

κγ΄. Πᾶν μοι συναρμόζει, ὃ σοὶ εὐάρμοστόν 
ἐστιν, ὦ κόσμε. οὐδέν μοι πρόωρον οὐδὲ ὄψιμον 
τὸ σοὶ εὔκαιρον. πᾶν μοι καρπός, ὃ φέρουσιν αἱ 
σαὶ ὧραι, ὦ φύσις" ἐκ σοῦ πώντα, ἐν σοὶ πώντα, 
εἰς σὲ πάντα. ἐκεῖνος μέν φησι, “Πόλι φίλη 
Κέκροπος. " σὺ δὲ οὐκ ἐρεῖς, “' Ὦ πόλι φίλη Δειός;" 

πῶς τ λίγα πρῆσσε, ᾿ φησίν, “ εἰ μέλλεις εὖ- 
θυμήσειν"" μήποτε ἄμεινον τἀναγκαῖα πράσσειν, 
ca ὅσα ὁ τοῦ φύσει πολιτικοῦ ζῴου λόγος αἱρεῖ 
καὶ ὡς αἱρεῖ; τοῦτο γὰρ οὐ μόνον τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ 
καλῶς πράσσειν εὐθυμίαν φέρει, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν 
ἀπὸ τοῦ ὀλίγα πράσσειν. τὰ πλεῖστα γάρ, ὧν 
λέγομεν καὶ πράσσομεν οὐκ ἀναγκαῖα ὄντα ἐάν τις 
περιέλῃ, εὐσχολώτερος καὶ ἀταρακτότερος ἔσται. 
ὅθεν δεῖ καὶ παρ᾽ ἕκαστα ἑαυτὸν ὑπομιμνήσκειν, 
μή τι τοῦτο οὐ τῶν ἀναγκαίων; δεῖ δὲ μὴ μόνον 
πράξεις τὰς μὴ ἀναγκαίας περιαιρεῖν ἀλλὰ καὶ 





* cp. Fronto, ad Cues. i. ὁ; Athenag. Apol. 36. Apuleius 
(Afet. iv. ad init.) calls beasts the living tombs of condemned 
criminals. Longinus (de Subl. 111.) inveighs ayainst the trope, 
as used by Gorgias of ieontim. 2 vii, 29. 

2 Nature, God, and the Universe were identical in the 
Stoic creed ; see Sen. N. Q. i. 45. 


80 


BOOK IV 


and the other animals. How great is the number 
consumed and thus in a way buned ! in the bodies of 
those who feed upon them! And yet room is made 
for them all by their conversion into blood, by their 
transmutation into air or fire. 

Where in this case lies the way of search for the 
truth? In a separation of the Material from the 
Causal.” 

22. Be not whirled aside; but in every impulse 
fulfil the claims of justice, and in every impression 
safeguard certainty. 

23. All that isin tune with thee, O Universe,’ is 
in tune with me! Nothing that is in due time for 
thee is too early or too late for me! All that thy 
seasons bring, O Nature, is fruit for me! All things 
come from thee, subsist in thee, go back to thee.* 
There is one who says Dear City of Cecrops?! Walt 
thou not say O dear City of Zeus? 

24, If thou wouldest be tranquil wm heart, says the 
Sage,® do not many things. Is not this a better 
maxim : do but what is needful, and what the reason 
of a living creature born for a civic life demands, 
and as it demands. For this brings the tranquillity 
which comes of doing few things no less than of doing 
them well. For nine tenths of our words and deeds 
being unnecessary, if a man retrench there, he will 
have more abundant leisure and fret the less. 
Wherefore forget not on every occasion to ask thyself, 
Is this one of the unnecessary things? But we must 
retrench not only actions but thoughts which are 

+ St. Paul, Rom. xi. 36, ἐξ αὐτοῦ δι᾽ αὐτοῦ εἰς αὐτὸν τὰ πάντα. 

* Seemingly a Fragment from Aristophanes 

6 Democritus (δύο). i. 100), τὸν εὐθυμεῖσθαι μέλλοντα χρὴ μὴ 
πολλὰ πρήσσειν ; ii. δ ; Sen. de Tran. 12, Hane stabilem anime 


sedem Graect εὐθυμίαν vocunt, de qua Democriti volumen eyrcy- 
tum est ego Tranquillitatem voco. δὴ 


G 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


f A \ >O\ / i 
φαντασίας: οὕτως yap οὐδὲ πράξεις παρέλκουσ- 
at ἐπακολουθήσουσιν. 

κε. Πείρασον πῶς σοι χωρεῖ καὶ ὁ τοῦ 
ἴω 7 nA 4 rat 
ἀγαθοῦ ἀνθρώπου βίος τοῦ ἀρεσκομένου μὲν τοῖς 
ca , 
ἐκ τῶν ὅλων ἀπονεμομένοις, ἀρκουμένου δὲ TH 
"Ὁ 7 ΄ , \ , > ᾿ς 
ἰδίᾳ πράξει δικαίᾳ καὶ διαθέσει εὐμενεῖ. 
Ὁ ἴων ἴω x 
κε΄. ᾿Ἑώρακας éxetva; ide καὶ ταῦτα. σεαυτὸν 
, 
μὴ τάρασσε' ἅπλωσον σεαυτόν. ἁμαρτάνει τις; 
[οὶ f / ‘4 ΄ὰ 
ἑαυτῷ ἁμαρτάνει. συμβέβηκέ σοΐ τι; καλῶς" ἐκ 
“ 4 3 3 3 n f \ 
τῶν ὅλων ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς col συγκαθείμαρτο καὶ 

, Ἂ Ν ca \ sd 
συνεκλώθετο πᾶν τὸ συμβαῖνον. τὸ δ᾽ ὅλον, 
βραχὺς ὁ βίος: κερδαντέον τὸ παρὸν σὺν εὖὐ- 
λογιστίᾳ καὶ δίκῃ. νῆφε ἀνειμένος." 

Y ͵ “y a ip “ ὴ DN \ 
Ke. “Hrot κόσμος διατεταγμένος ἢ κυκεὼν 
4 2 77 2 \ / \ 9 \ 
+ cuuted opnmévos” μέν, ἀλλὰ κόσμος. ἢ ἐν col 
μέν τις κόσμος ὑφίστασθαι δύναται, ἐν δὲ τῷ 
παντὶ ἀκοσμία, καὶ ταῦτα οὕτως πάντων δια- 
κεκριμένων καὶ διακεχυμένων καὶ συμπαθῶν; 
f iy fal cy o 
Ky’. Mérav ἦθος, θῆλυ ἦθος, περισκελὲς ἦθος, 
σι n n f 
θηριῶδες, βοσκηματῶδες, παιδαριῶδες, βλακικὸν, 
/ f 7 “ 
κίβδηλον, βωμολόχον, καπηλικόν, τυραννικόν. 
᾽ 3 / f ¢ \ , \ 3 
KO. Ev ἕένος κόσμον ὁ μὴ γνωριξων τὰ ἐν 
na 3 χὰ e Ν / 
αὐτῷ ὄντα, οὐχ ἧττον ξένος Kal ὁ μὴ γνωρίξων τὰ 
, ς ΄ ἈΝ) Ν 
γινόμενα. φυγάς, ο φεύγων τὸν πολιτικὸν Noor’ 


1 ἀνειμέρως A, 
“) 


2 συμπεφυρμένος Schultz, but ep. Plato, λαρά, 253 τ: 
Rendall reads ἀλλὰ μὴν κόσμος ἢ. 





1 iv. 87; ix. 37. Dio (71. 84 §§ 4, 5) says of Marcus οὐδὲν 
προσποίητον εἶχε, and he 15 a far better authority than Capit. 
xxix. 6 and xx. 1-4. “1x. 4, 38. Sun. Ll; iv. 34. 


82 


BOOK IV 


unnecessary, for then neither will distracting actions 
follow. 

25. Try living the life of the good man who is 
more than content with what 1s allotted to him out 
of the whole, and is satisfied with his own acts as just 
and his own disposition as kindly: see how that 
answers. 

26, Hast thou looked on that side of the picture ? 
Look now on this! Fret not thyself; study to be 
simple.t Does a mando wrong? The wrong rests 
with him.? Has something befallen thee? It iy well. 
Kverything that befalls was trom the beginning 
destined and spun® for thee as thy share out of the 
Whole. In a word, lite is short.+ Make profit of 
the present by right reasoning and justice. In thy 
relaxation be sober. 

27. Hither there is a well-arranged Order of things 
or a medley that is confused,® yet still an order. 
Or can a sort of order subsist in thee, while in the 
Universe there is no order, and that too when all 
things, though separated and dispersed, are still in 
sympathetic connexion ? 

28. A black character,6 an unmanly character, 
an obstinate character, inhuman, animal, childish, 
stupid, counterfeit, shameless, mercenary, tyrann- 
ical.’ 

29. If he is an ahen in the Universe who has no 
cognizance of the things that are in it, no less is he 
an alien § who has no cognizance of what is happening 
in it. He is an exile, who exiles himself from civic 

Pave 17, ὅ νι. 10. δ ἵν, 18. 

τ Marcus here in his vehemence seems to violate his own 
gentle precepts. He must be thinking of some monster of 


iniquity, such as Nero. 
S iv. 46. cp. 1 St. Peter, iv. 12. 


2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τυφλός, 0 καταμύων τῷ νοερῷ ὄμματι" πτωχός, ὁ 
ἐνδεὴς ἑτέρου καὶ μὴ πάντα ἔχων Tap ἑαυτοῦ τὰ 
εἰς τὸν βίον χρήσιμα' ἀπόστημα κόσμου, ὁ 
ἀφιστάμενος καὶ γωρίζων ἑαυτὸν τοῦ τῆς κοινῆς 
φύσεως λόγον διὰ τοῦ δυσαρεστεῖν τοῖς συμ- 
βαίνουσιν" ἐκείνη γὰρ φέρει τοῦτο, ἣ καὶ σὲ 
Heyer" ἀπόσχισμα πόλεως, ὁ τὴν ἰδίαν ψυχὴν 
τῆς τῶν λογικῶν ἀποσχίξων, μιᾶς οὔσης. 

λ΄. ὋὉ μὲν χωρὶς χιτῶνος φιλοσοφεῖ, ὁ δὲ 
χωρὶς βιβλίου" ἄλλος οὗτος ἡμίγυμνος, " ᾿Άρτους 
οὐκ ἔχω, ᾿ φησί, “' καὶ ἐμμένω τῷ λόγῳ." ἐγὼ δὲ 

“τροφὰς τὰς ἐκ τῶν μαθημάτων οὐκ ἔχω, καὶ 
ἐμμένω." 

λα΄. Τὸ τεχνίον, ὃ ἔμαθες, φίλει, τούτῳ προσ- 
αναπαύου" τὸ δὲ ὑπόλοιπον τοῦ βίου διέξελθε, 
ὡς θεοῖς μὲν ἐπιτετροφὼς τὰ σεαυτοῦ πάντα ἐξ 
ὅλης τῆς ψυχῆς, ἀνθρώπων δὲ μηδενὸς μήτε 
τύραννον. μήτε δοῦλον σεαυτὸν καθιστάς. 

λβ΄. ᾿Ιὑπινόησον λόγου χάριν τοὺς ἐπὶ Oveo- 
πασιανοῦ καιρούς, ὄψει ταῦτα πάντα' γαμοῦν- 
TAS, παιδοτροφοῦντας, νοσοῦντας, ἀποθνήσκοντας, 
πολεμοῦντας, ἑορτάξοντας, ἐμπορενομένους, Ἰγεωρ- 
γοῦντας, κολακεύοντας, αὐθαδιζομένους, ὑποπτεύ- 
οντᾶς, ἐπιβουλεύοντας, ἀποθανεῖν τινας εὖὐχο- 
μένους, γογγύξζοντας ἐπὶ τοῖς παροῦσιν, ἐρῶντας, 
θησαυρίζοντας, ὑπατείας, βασιλείας ἐπιθυμ- 
οὔντας. οὐκοῦν ἐκεῖνος μὲν ὁ τούτων βίος οὐκ 
ἔτι οὐδαμοῦ. 

Tlanrev ἐπὶ τοὺς καιροὺς τοὺς Τραϊανοῦ μετάβηθι' 
πάλιν τὰ αὐτὰ πάώντα' τέθνηκε κἀκεῖνος ὁ Bios. 





1: Matt xi. 15. 2a. 16. - 
3 villi. 84 ep. St. Paul, Rom. xii. 5; 1 Cor. xii. 90 1. 


84 


BOOK IV 


reason ; blind, he who will not see with the eyes of his 
understanding ! ; a beggar, he who is dependent on 
another, and ΡΝ draw fon his own resources all 
that his life requires; an imposthume? on the 
Universe, he who renounces, and severs himself from, 
the reason of our common Nature, because he is 
ill pleased at what happens—for the same Nature 
brings this into being, that also brought thee ; a limb 
cut off from the community,’ he who cuts off his own 
soul from the soul of all rational things, which is but 
one. 

30. One philosopher goes without a shirt, a second 
without a book, a third “yonder half-naked: says he, 
] am starving for bread, yet cleave I fast to Reason ; and 
7 get no living out of my learning, yet cleave T to her. 

31. Cherish the art, though humble, that thou hast 
learned, and take thy rest therein : and pass through 
the remainder of thy days as one that with his whole 
soul has given all that is his in trust to the Gods, and 
has made of himself neither a tyrant nora slave to 
any man. 

32. Think by way of illustratiou upon the times of 
Vespasian, and thou shalt see all these things : man- 
kind marrying, rearing children, sickening, dying, 
warring, making holiday, trafficking, tilling, flattering 
others, vaunting themselves, suspecting, ‘scheming, 
praying for the death of others,* murmuring at their 
own lot, loving, hoarding, coveting a consulate, 
coveting a kingdom. Not a vestige of that life of 
theirs is left anywhere any longer. 

Change the scene again to the times of Trajan. 
Again it is all the same; that life too is dead. In like 


4 See a characteristic anecdote of Marcus’ mother, Capit. 
vi. 9. 


85 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ὁμοίως καὶ Tas ἄλλας ἐπυγραφὰς χρόνων καὶ 
ὅλων ἐθνῶν ἐπιθεώρει, καὶ βλέπε πόσοι κατεν- 
ταθέντες μετὰ μικρὸν ἔπεσον καὶ ἀνελύθησαν εἰς 
Ta στοιχεῖα. μάλιστα δὲ ἀναπολητέον ἐκείνους, 
ods αὐτὸς ἔγνως κενὰ σπωμένους, ἀφέντας ποιεῖν 
τὸ κατὰ τὴν ἰδίαν κατασκευὴν καὶ τούτου ἀπρὶξ 
ἔχεσθαι καὶ τούτῳ ἀρκεῖσθαι. ἀναγκαῖον δὲ 
ὧδε τὸ μεμνῆσθαι, ὅτι καὶ ἡ ἐπιστροφὴ καθ' 
ἑκάστην πρᾶξιν ἰδίαν ἀξίαν ἔχει καὶ συμμετρίαν. 
οὕτως γὰρ οὐκ ἀποδυσπετήσεις, ἐὰν "μὴ ἐπὶ 
πλέον ἢ προσῆκε περὶ τὰ ἐλάσσω καταγίνῃ. 

Ay. Αἱ πάλαι συνήθεις λέξεις γλωσσήματα 
νῦν. οὕτως οὗν καὶ τὰ ὀνόματα τῶν πάλαι 
πολυυμνήτων νῦν τρόπον τινὰ γλωσσήματά ἐ ἐστι, 
Κάμιλλος, Καίσων, Θύόλεσος, Δέντατοςἷ κατ᾽ 
ὀλίγον δὲ καὶ Σκιπίων, καὶ Κάτων, εἶτα καὶ 
Αὔγουατος, εἶτα καὶ ᾿Αδριανὸς καὶ ᾿Αντωνῖνος. 
ἐξίτηλα γὰρ πάντα καὶ μυθώδη ταχὺ γίνεται" 
ταχὺ δὲ καὶ παντελὴς λήθη κατέχωσεν. καὶ 
ταῦτα λέγω ἐπὶ τῶν θαυμαστῶς πως λαμψάντων. 
οἱ γὰρ λοιποὶ ἅμα τῷ ἐκπνεῦσαι “ἄιστοι, 
ἄπυστοι." τί δὲ καὶ ἔστιν ὅλως τὸ ἀείμνηστον; 
ὅλον κενόν. τί οὖν ἐστι, περὶ ὃ δεῖ σπουδὴν 
εἰσφέρεσθαι; ἕν τοῦτο, διάνοια δικαία καὶ 
πράξεις κοινωνικαὶ καὶ λόγος οἷος μήποτε 
διαψεύσασθαι καὶ διάθεσις ἀσπαζομένη πᾶν τὸ 
συμβαῖνον ὡς ἀναγκαῖον, ὡς γνώριμον, ὡς ἀπ᾽ 
ἀρχῆς τοιαύτης καὶ πηγῆς ῥέον. 

1 Οὐόλεσος PA: Οὐολόγεσος Μο" : Λεοννάτος PA: Δέν- 
τατος Wyse. 





lin. 11 ad fin. ey. θ. 
86 


BOOK IY 


manner contemplate all the other records of past 
time and of entire nations, and see how many after 
all their high-strung efforts sank down so soon in 
death and were resolved into the elements But 
above all must thou dwell in thought upon those 
whom thou hast thyself known, who, following after 
vanity, neglected to do the things that accorded 
with their own constitution and, cleaving steadfastly 
thereto, to be content with them. And here it is 
essential to remember that a due sense of value ! 
and proportion should regulate the care bestowed on 
every action. For thus wilt thou never give over in 
disgust, if thou busy not thyself beyond what is 
right with the lesser things. 

33. Expressions once in use are now obsolete. So 
also the names of those much be-sung? heroes of old 
are in some sense obsolete, Camillus, Caeso, Volesus,® 
Dentatus, and a little later Scipio and Cato, then 
also Augustus, and then Hadrianus and Anto- 
ninus. For all things quickly fade away and become 
legendary, and soon absolute oblivion encairns them. 
And here I speak of those who made an extraordin- 
ary blaze in the world. For the rest, as soon as the 
breath is out of their bodies, it is, Out of sight, out of 
mind.* But what, when all is said, is even ever- 
lasting remembrance? ? Wholly vanity. What then 
is it that calls for our devotion? This one thing: 
justice in thought, in act unselfishness and a tongue 
that cannot lie and a disposition ready to welcome 
all that befalls as unavoidable, as familiar,° as issuing 
from a like origin and fountain-head. 


3 Volesus, or Volusus, was the family name of the Valern. 
Valerius Poplicola must be meant, the obsolete name adding 
to the point. * Hom. Od. 1. 242. *4y,- 19, ἦν, 44. 


87 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ro. ‘Ex@v σεαυτὸν τῇ ἰάλωθοῖ συνεπιδίδου, 
παρέχων συννῆσαι οἷστισί ποτε πράγμασι 
βούλεται. 

re. Πᾶν ἐφήμερον, καὶ τὸ μνημονεῦον καὶ τὸ 
μνημονευόμενον. 

As". Θεώρει διηνεκῶς πάντα κατὰ μεταβολὴν 
γινόμενα καὶ ἐθίζου ἐ ἐννοεῖν, ὅτι οὐδὲν οὕτως φιλεῖ 
ἡ τῶν ὅλων φύσις ὡς τὸ τὰ ὄντα μεταβάλλειν, 
καὶ ποιεῖν νέα ὅμοια. σπέρμα γὰρ τρόπον τινὰ 
πᾶν τὸ ὃν τοῦ ἐξ αὐτοῦ ἐσομένου. σὺ δὲ μόνα 
σπέρματα φαντάζῃ Ta εἰς γῆν ἢ μήτραν κατα- 
βαλλόμενα: τοῦτο δὲ λίαν ἰδιωτικόν. 

λζ΄. Ἤδη τεθνήξῃ, καὶ οὔπω οὔτε ἁπλοῦς, 
οὔτε ἀτάραχος, οὔτε ἀνύποπτος τοῦ βλαβῆ ῆναι 

ἂν ἔξωθεν, οὔτε ἵλεως πρὸς πάντας, οὔτε τὸ 
φρονεῖν ἐν μόνῳ τῷ δικαιοπραγεῖν τιθέμενος. 

Ay’. Τὰ ἡγεμονικὰ αὐτῶν διάβλεπε, καὶ τοὺς 
φρονίμους, οἷα μὲν φεύγουσιν, οἷα δὲ διώκουσιν. 

λθ΄. ᾿Ιὺν ἀλλοτρίῳ ἡγεμονικῷ κακὸν σὸν οὐχ 
ὑφίσταται: οὐδὲ μὴν ἔν τινι τροπῇ καὶ ἑτεροιώσει 
τοῦ περιέχοντος. ποῦ οὗν; ὅπου τὸ περὶ κακῶν 
ὑπολαμβάνον σοί ἐστε. τοῦτο οὖν μὴ ὑπολαμβ- 
ανέτω, καὶ πάντα εὖ ἔχει. κἂν τὸ ἐγγυτάτω 
αὐτοῦ, τὸ σωμάτιον, τέμνηται, καίηται, δια- 
πυΐσκηται, σήπηται, ὅμως τὸ ὑπολαμβάνον περὶ 
τούτων μόριον ἡσυχαξέτω" τουτέστι, κρινέτω 
μήτε κακόν τι εἶναι μήτε ἀγαθόν, ὃ ἐπίσης 
δύναται κακῷ ἀνδρὶ καὶ ἀγαθῷ συμβαίνειν. ὃ 
γὰρ «καὶ τῷ παρὰ φύσιν} καὶ τῷ κατὰ φύσιν 

1 « καὶ τῷ παρὰ φύσιν -- Cas. Gat. 
1 cop. Herodian (1. 2, § 4) of Marcus, τοὺς πρυσίοντας δεζιού- 
uevos, and Aristides, ad Reg. §112 (Jebb). 
88 


BOOK IV 


34. Offer thyself whole-heartedly to Clotho, letting 
her spin thy thread toserve what purpose soever she 
will. 

35, Ephemeral all of them, the rememberer as 
well as the remembered ! 

36. Unceasingly contemplate the generation of all 
things through change, and hecuston thyself to the 
thought that the Nature of the Universe delights 
above all in changing the things that exist ‘and 
making new ones of the same pattern. For in a 
manner everything that exists is the seed of that 
which shall come out of it. But thou imaginest 
that only to be seed that is deposited in the earth or 
the womb, a view beyond measure unphilosophical 

37. A moment and thou wilt be dead; and not 
even yet art thou simple, nor unperturbed, nor free 
from all suspicion that thou canst be injured by 
externals, nor gracious! to all, nor convinced that 
wisdom and just dealing are but one. 

38. Consider narrowly their ruling Reason, and 
sce what wise men avoid and what they seek after.* 

39. Harm to thee cannot depend on another's 
ruling Reason, nor yet on any vagary or phase of 
thy environment. On what then? On the power 
that is thine of judging what is evil. Let this, 
then, pass no judgment, and all is well. Even if 
its closest associate, the poor body, be cut, be burnt, 
fester, gangrene, vet let the part which forms a 
judgment 3 about these things hold its peace, that is, 
let it assume nothing to be either good or bad, which 
can befall a good man or a bad indiffer ently.4 For 
that which befalls alike the man who lives by the 


2 ρου, tad it This precept does not really contradict 
what 1s said in ui. 4 ete, ὁ χι, 10. tai, ΤΊ ad med. 


39g 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Beodvte ἐπίσης συμβαίνει, τοῦτο οὔτε κατὰ φύσιν 
ἐστὶν οὔτε παρὰ φύσιν. 

μ΄. Ὥς ἕν S@ov TOV κόσμον͵ μίαν. οὐσίαν καὶ 
ψυχὴν μίαν ἐπέχον. συνεχῶς ἐπινοεῖν" καὶ πῶς 
εἰς αἴσθησιν μίαν τὴν τούτου πάντα ἀναδίδοται" 
καὶ πῶς ὁρμῇ μιᾷ πάντα πράσσει" καὶ πῶς 
πάντα πάντων τῶν γινομένων συναίτια" καὶ οἵα 
τις ἡ σύννησις καὶ συμμήρυσις. 

μα΄. “Ψυχάριον εἶ βαστάζον νεκρόν, ὡς ᾿Επί.- 
κτητος ἔλεγεν. 

μ΄. Οὐδέν ἐστε κακὸν τοῖς ἐν μεταβολῇ 
γινομένοις" ὡς οὐδὲ ἀγαθὸν --τοῖς;» ἐκ μεταβολῆς 
ὑφισταμένοις. 

jar’. Tlorapos τίς ἐκ τῶν γινομένων καὶ ῥεῦμα 
Brasov ὁ αἰών' ἅμα τε γὰρ ὥφθη ἕκαστον. καὶ 
παρενήνεκται, καὶ ἄλλο παραφέρεται, τὸ δὲ 
ἐνεχθήσεται. 

wo. Πᾶν τὸ συμβαῖνον οὕτως σύνηθες καὶ 
γνώριμον, ὡς τὸ ῥόδον ἐν τῷ ἔαρι καὶ ὀπώρα 
ε ” 9 θέρει" τοιοῦτον yap Kat νόσος καὶ θάνατος 

βλασφημία καὶ ἐπιβουλὴ καὶ ὅσα τοὺς 

ΠΤ Ὲ Na πε ἢ λυπεῖ. 

με΄. Τὰ ἑξῆς ἀεὶ τοῖς προηγησαμένοις οἰκείως 
ἐπυγίνεται" οὐ γὰρ οἷον καταρίθμησίς τίς ἐστιν 
ἀπηρτημένως ἢ καὶ μόνον τὸ κατηναγκασμένον 
ἔχουσα, ἀλλὰ συνάφεια εὔλογος" καὶ ὥσπερ 
συντέτακται συνηρμοσμένως τὰ ὄντα, οὕτως τὰ 


1 ἀπηρτημένων Gat. 





1 A Stoic doctrine, Diog Laert. Zeno. 36. 
2 For ἀναδίδοσθαι, cp. v. 26. eee 11; 
4 Not now found in his works. Swinburne has ‘‘ A little 


go 


BOOK IV 


rule, and the man who lives contrary to the rule, of 
Nature, 1s neither in accordance with Nature nor 
contrary to it. 

40. Cease not to think of the Universe as one hving 
Being,' possessed of a single Substance and a single 
Soul; and how all things trace back to its single 
sentience ;2 and how it does all things by a 
single impulse ; and how all existing things are joint 
causes of all things that come into existence; and 
how intertwined in the fabric is the thread and how 
closely woven the web.? 

41. Thou art a (ttle soul bearing up a corpse, as 
Epictetus said.4 

42. Nothing is evil to that which is subject to 
change, even as there is no gvod for that which 
exists as the result of change. 

43. As a river® consisting of all things that come 
into being, aye, a rushing torrent, is Time. No 
sooner is a thing sighted than it is carried past, and 
lo, another is passing, and it too will be carried away. 

44, Everything that happens is as usual and 
familiar,’ as the rose in spring and the fruit in 
autumn. The same applies to disease and death 
and slander and treachery and all that gladdens the 
foolish or saddens then. 

45. That which comes after always has a close 
relationship to what has gone before. For it is not 
like some enumeration of items separately taken 
and following a mere inevitable sequence, but there 
is a rational connection ; and just as existing things 
have been combined in a harmonious order, so also 


soul for a little bears up this corpse which is man” (Hymn 
to Proserpine). cp. Ignat. ad Smyrn. ὃ vexpopdpos. 
51.173 v. 298 ; vi. 15 (Herachitus). 8 iv. 33 


ΟἹ 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


γινόμενα οὐ διαδοχὴν ψιλὴν ἀλλὰ θαυμαστήν 
τινα οἰκειότητα “ἐμφαίνει. 
,ὔ , a td 
us’. ᾿Δεὶ τοῦ ᾿Ηρακλειτείου μεμνῆσθαι" ὅτι 
ξ na θ 7 “ὃ 43} / θ \ ξξ “ὃ 
γῆς θάνατος ὕδωρ᾽᾽ γενέσθαι, καὶ “ὕδατος 
/ 43 ’ \ 7 “ 
θάνατος ἀέρα γενέσθαι, καὶ “ἀέρος πῦρ," καὶ 
ral ins \ la) 
ἔμπαλιν. μεμνῆσθαι δὲ καὶ “Tod ἐπιλανθανο- 
ζω ὃ τ᾽ ® 
μένου, ἡ ἡ ὁδὸς dryer” καὶ ὅτι “ᾧ μάλιστα διηνεκ- 
OS ὁμιλοῦσι," λόγῳ τῷ τὰ ὅλα διοικοῦντι, “τούτῳ 
διαφέρονται" καὶ “ois καθ' ἡμέραν ἐγκυροῦσι, 
3 
ταῦτα αὐτοῖς ξένα φαίνεται: καὶ ὅτι οὐ δεῖ 
“ὥσπερ καθεύδοντας ποιεῖν καὶ λέγειν" καὶ 
/ n A 
yap καὶ τότε δοκοῦμεν ποιεῖν καὶ λέγειν" καὶ 
“ n , y 
ὅτι ov δεῖ “παῖδας τοκεώνων, τουτέστι κατὰ 
’ ςς / / 33 
thov, “καθότι παρειλήφαμεν. 
pe. Ὥσπερ εἴ τίς σοι θεῶν εἶπεν, ὅτι αὔριον 
τεθνήξῃ ἢ πάντως γε εἰς, τρίτην, οὐκ ἔτ᾽ ἂν 
παρὰ μέγα ἐποιοῦ τὸ εἰς τρίτην μᾶλλον ἢ 
αὔριον, εἴ γε μὴ ἐσχάτως ἀγεννὴς εἶ" πόσον γάρ 
ἐστι τὸ μεταξύ: οὕτως καὶ τὸ εἰς πολλοστὸν 
ἔτος μᾶλλον ἢ αὔριον μηδὲν μέγα εἶναι νόμιξε. 
μη. ᾿Εννοεῖν συνεχῶς πόσοι μὲν ἰατροὶ 
ἀποτεθνήκασι πολλάκις τὰς ὀφρῦς ὑπὲρ τῶν 
ἀρρώστων συσπάσαντες' πόσοι δὲ μαθηματικοὶ 
, f 7 
ἄλλων θανάτους ὥς τι μέγα προειπόντες" πόσοι 
\ / \ / na 2 ΄ “ 
δὲ φιλόσοφοι, περὶ θανάτου ἢ ἀθανασίας μυρία 
’ veal 
OLATELVU EVOL’ πόσοι δὲ ἀριστεῖς πολλοὺς ἀπο- 
f 5 / A 
κτείναντες" πόσοι δὲ TUpavvar ἐξουσίᾳ ψυχῶν 


1 χοκέων ὧν PAD: τοκεώνων Rend This Ionic word was 
recovered for Meleager by Headlam (4nth. Pal. vii. 79). 


1 vi 38; vii 9 
2 A favourite with Marcus, see Index JT. 3 vi. 42. 


BOOK IV 


ull that comes into being bears the stamp not of a 
mere succession but of ἢ wonderful relationship. 

46. Always bear m mind what Heraclitus? said: 
The death of earth 1s tu pass into mater, and the death 
of water lo pass into air, and of ar to pass into frre, 
and so back again. Bear in mind too: the my farer 
who forgets the trend of his may, and that men are at 
variance mith the one thing with whech they are in the 
most unbroken communion, the Reason that administers 
the whole Universe; and that what they encounter 
every day, this they deem strange: and that we must 
not act und speak like men asleep,2—for m fact even in 
sleep we seem to act and speak ;—and that there 
should be nothing of the children from parents style, 
that is, no mere perfunctory what our Fathers have 
told us, 

47. Just as, if a God had told thee, Thou shalt 
die to-morrom or in any case the day after, thou wouldest 
no longer count it of any consequence whether it 
were the day after to-morrow or to-morrow, unless 
thou art in the last degree mean-spirited,® for how 
little is the difference !®—so also deem it but a 
trifling thing that thou shouldest die after ever so 
many years rather than to-morrow. 

48. Cease not to bear in mind how many physicians 
are dead after puckering up their brows so often 
over their patients; and how many astrologers after 
making a great parade‘of predicting the “death of 
others 7 and how many philosophers after endless 
disquisitions on death and immortality; how many 
great captains after butchering thousands*; how 
many tyrants after exercismg with revolting insolence 

+ cop the story of Mycerinus (Herod. 1. 129), and 


M. Arnold’s poem, > Sen. VQ. 11. 59 ad med. 
8 Or anterval, ep. iv 50. 7111. 8. Epict. 11,10, 1ὅ, 5 δῥκί, 
93 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


μετὰ δεινοῦ φρυάγματος ὡς ἀθάνατοι κεχρημένοι' 
πόσαι δὲ πόλεις ὅλαι, ἵν᾽ οὕτως εἴπω, τεθνή- 
κασιν, ᾿᾿λίκη καὶ ἸΙομπήιοι καὶ ᾿Ἡ ρκλάνον καὶ 
ἄλλαι ἀναρίθμητοι. 

Ἔπιθι δὲ καὶ ὅσους οἶδας, ἄλλον ἐπ᾽ ἄλλῳ" ὁ 
μὲν τοῦτον κηδεύσας εἶτα ἐξετάθη, ὁ ὁ δὲ ἐκεῖνον' 
πάντα δὲ ἐν βραχεῖ. τὸ γὰρ ὅλον, κατιδεῖν ἀ ἀεὶ τὰ 
ἀνθρώπινα ὡς ἐφήμερα καὶ εὐτελῆ, καὶ ἐχθὲς μὲν 
μυξάριον, αὔριον δὲ τάριχος ἢ τέφρα. τὸ ἀκαριαῖον 
οὖν τούτου τοῦ χρόνου κατὰ φύσιν διελθεῖν, 
καὶ ἵλεων καταλῦσαι, ὡς ἂν εἰ ἐλαία πέπειρος 
γενομένη ἔπιπτεν εὐφημοῦσα τὴν ἐνεγκοῦσαν 
καὶ χάριν εἰδυΐα τῷ φύσαντι δένδρῳ. 

μθ΄. “Ὅμοιον εἶναι τῇ ἄκρᾳ, ἡ ἡ διηνεκῶς τὰ 
κύματα προσρήσσεται" ἡ δὲ ἕστηκε, καὶ περὶ 
αὐτὴν κοιμίξεται τὰ φλεγμήναντα τοῦ ὕδατος. 

ον ᾿Ατυχὴς ἐ ἐγώ, ὅτι τοῦτό μοι συνέβη." οὐμενοῦν' 
ἀλλ᾽ “εὐτυχὴς ἐγώ, ὅτι τούτου μοι συμβεβη- 
κότος ἄλυπος διατελῶ οὔτε ὑπὸ «τοῦ!» παρόντος 
θραυόμενος οὔτε «τὸ» ἐπεὸν φοβούμενος." 
συμβῆναι μὲν γὰρ τὸ τοιοῦτο παντὶ ἐδύνατο' 
ἄλυπος δὲ οὐ πᾶς ἐπὶ τούτῳ ἂν διετέλεσεν. διὰ 
τί οὖν ἐκεῖνο μᾶλλον ἀτύχημα ἢ τοῦτο εὐτύχημα; 
λέγεις δὲ ὅλως ἀτύχημα ἀνθρώπου, ὃ οὐκ ἔστιν 
ἀπότευγμα τῆς φύσεως τοῦ ἀνθρώπου; ἀπό- 
τευγμᾶ δὲ τῆς φύσεως τοῦ ἀνθρώπου εἶναι δοκεῖ 
σοι, ὃ μὴ παρὰ τὸ βούλημα τῆς φύσεως αὐτοῦ 
ἐστιν; τί οὖν; τὸ βούλημα μεμάθηκας" μή τι 
οὖν τὸ συμβεβηκὸς τοῦτο κωλύει σε δίκαιον 

1 Lucian uses it, Charon 23. 


“x. 84, This is invariably referred to ὁ μέν, ‘another 
closed his eyes,” Lut it must surely answer to τοῦτον. 


94 


BOOK IV 


their power of lite and death, as though themselves 
immortal; and how many entire cities are, if 1 may 
use the expression, dead,! Helice and Pompeii and 
Herculaneum, and others without number. 

Turn also to all, one after another, that come 
within thine own knowledge. One closed a friend’s 
eyes and was then himself laid out, and the friend 
who closed his,? he too was laid cut—and all this in 
a few short years. In a word, fail not to note how 
short-lived are all mortal things, and how paltry— 
yesterday a little mucus,’ to-morrow a mummy or 
burnt ash. Pass then through this tiny span of time 
in accordance with Nature, and come to thy journey’s 
end with a good grace, just as an olive falls when it 
is fully ripe, praising the earth that bare it and 
grateful to the tree that gave it growth. 

49. Be like a headland of rock on which the 
waves break incessantly; but it stands fast and 
around it the seething of the waters sinks to rest. 

dh,unlucky am J, that this has befallen me! Nay, but 
rather, lucky am Ϊ, that though this has befallen me, 
yet am I still unhurt, neither crushed by the present 
nor dreading the future. For something of the 
kind could have befallen everyone, but everyone 
would not have remained unhurt in spite of it. Why 
then count that rather a misfortune than this a good 
fortune? And in any case dost thou reckon that a 
misfortune for a man which is not an aberration from 
his nature? And wouldst thou have that to be an 
aberration from a man’s nature, which does not 
contravene the will of his nature! What then? 
This will thou hast learnt to know. Does what has 
befallen thee hinder thee one whit from being just, 


* vi. 13. 
95 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


εἶναι, μεγαλόψυχον, σώφρονα, ἔμφρονα, ἀπρόπτ- 
@TOD, ἀδιάψευστον, αἰδήμονα, ἐλεύθερον, τἄλλα, 
ὧν παρόντων ἡ φύσις ἡ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἀπέχει 
τὰ ἴδια; μέμνησο λοιπὸν ἐπὶ παντὸς τοῦ εἰς 
λύπην σε προαγομένου, τούτῳ χρῆσθαι τῷ 
δό are “Οὐχ ὅτι τοῦτο ἀτύχημα, ἀλλὰ τὸ 
φέρειν αὐτὸ γενναίως εὐτύχημα." 

ν΄, ᾿[διωτικὸν μέν, ὅμως δὲ ἀνυστικὸν βοήθημα 
πρὸς θανάτου καταφρόνησιν ἡ ἀναπόλησις τῶν 
γλίσχρως ἐνδιατριψάντων τῷ ζῆν. τί οὖν αὐτοῖς 
πλέον ἢ τοῖς ἀώροις; πάντως πού ποτε κεῖνται, 
Καδικιανός, Φάβιος, ᾿Ιουλιανός, Λέπιδος, ἢ εἴ 
τις τοιοῦτος, οἱ πολλοὺς ἐξήνεγκαν, εἶτα ἐξηνέχθ- 
ησαν' ὅλον, μικρόν ἐστι τὸ διάστημα, καὶ 
τοῦτο OL ὅσων καὶ μεθ' οἵων ἐξαντλούμενον καὶ 
ἐν οἵῳ TOMATO: μὴ οὗν ὡς πρᾶγμα. βλέπε 
γὰρ ὀπίσω τὸ ἀχανὲς τοῦ αἰῶνος, καὶ τὸ πρόσω 
ἄλλο ἄπειρον. ἐν δὴ τούτῳ, τί διαφέρει ὁ τρι- 
ἥμερος τοῦ τριγερηνίου; 


να΄. Kari τὴν σύντομον ἀεὶ τρέχε: “σύντομος δὲ 
ἡ κατὰ φύσιν, ὥστε κατὰ τὸ ὑγιέστατον πᾶν 
λέγειν καὶ πράσσειν. ἀπαλλάσσει γὰρ ἡ 


τοιαύτη πρόθεσις κόπων καὶ στρατείας, ᾿ καὶ 
μὲ γι. οἰκονομίας καὶ κομψείας. 
1 στραγγείας (vacillation) Stephan. But Pollux in his Ono- 


masticon, dedicated to Commodus mn Marcus’ lifetime, rejects 
the word. 


1 eat 48, § 2. 2 iv. 47. 
ὁ πριγερήνιος, a clever conflation between τριγέρων and 
Γερήνιος, an epithet of Nestor from a town in Messen. 





g6 


BOOK IV 


high-minded, chaste, sensible, deliberate, straight- 
forward, inodest, free, and from possessing all the 
other qualities, the presence of which enables a 
man’s nature to come fully into its own? Forget 
not in future, when anything would lead thee 
to feel hurt, to take thy stand upon this axiom: 
This is no misfortune, but to bear at nobly is good 
fortune. 

50. An unplulosophical, but none the less an 
effective, help to the contemning of death is to tell 
over the names of those who have clung long and 
tenaciously to life. How are they better off than 
those who were cut off before their time? After all, 
thev lie buried somewhere at last, Cadicianus, Fabius, 
Julianus, Lepidus, and any others like them, who 
after carrying many to their graves were at last 
carried to their own.! Small,in any point of view, is 
the difference 3 in length, and that too lived out to 
the dregs amid what great cares and with what sort 
of companions and in what kind of a body! Count 
it then of no consequence. For look at the yawning 
gulf of Time behind thee, and before thee at another 
Infinity to come. In this Eternity the life of a baby 
of three days and the life of a Nestor of three 
centuries 5. are as one.* 

51. Run ever the short way; and the short way is 
the way of Nature, that leads to all that is most 
sound in speech and act. For a resolve such as this 
is a release from troubles and strife, from al] mental 
reservation ὅ and affectation. 


+ cp. Eeclesiasticus, xh. 4. se hire 10; 


97 


ΒΙΒΛΙΟΝ E 


α΄. Ὄρθρου ὃ ὅταν δυσόκνως ἐξεγείρῃ, πρόχειρον 
ἔστω, ὅτι “ἐπὶ ἀνθρώπου ἔργον ἐγείρομαι" ° ἔτι 
οὗν 1 δυσκολαίνω, εἰ πορεύομαι ἐπὶ τὸ ποιεῖν, ὧν 
ἕνεκεν γέγονα, καὶ ὧν χάριν προῆγμαι εἰς τὸν 
κόσμον; ἢ ἐπὶ τοῦτο κατεσκεύασμαι, ἵνα κατακείμ- 
EVOS ἐν στρωματίοις ἐμαυτὸν θάλπω; “᾿Αλλὰ τοῦτο 
ἥδιον." “πρὸς τὸ ἥδεσθαι οὖν γέγονας; ὅλως δὲ 
σὺ" πρὸς πεῖσιν," ἢ πρὸς ἐνέργειαι; οὐ βλέπεις 
τὰ φυτάρια, τὰ στρουθάρια, τοὺς μύρμηκας, τοὺς 
ἀράχνας, τὰς μελίσσας τὸ ἴδιον ποιούσας, τὸ! 
καθ᾽ αὑτὰς συγκροτούσας κόσμον; ἔπειτα σὺ οὐ 
θέλεις τὰ ἀνθρωπικὰ ποιεῖν; οὐ τρέχεις ἐπὶ τὸ 
κατὰ τὴν σὴν φύσιν; “᾿Αλλὰ δεῖ καὶ ἀναπαύ- 
εσθαι." φημὶ κὠγώ" ἔδωκε μέντοι καὶ τούτου 
μέτρα ἡ φύσις" ἔδωκε μέντοι καὶ τοῦ ἐσθίειν καὶ 
πίνειν" καὶ ὅμως σὺ ὑπὲρ τὰ μέτρα, ὑπὲρ τὰ 
ἀρκοῦντα προχωρεῖς" ἐν δὲ ταῖς πράξεσιν οὐκ ἔτι, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐντὸς τοῦ δυνατοῦ. 

1 τί οὖν Menag. " οὐ PAD: σὺ Schindt. 

ὁ ποιεῖν P: «τὸ: ποιεῖν Cor.: ποίησιν Wilam 

4 τὸν PD> συγκοσμούσας Ὁ. 





ἘΠῚ Ἢ : 
2 Marcus in younger days was an early riser, getting up 
even at 3 o’clock (Fronto, ad Caes, iv. 5) or 5 o’clock (ibid. 


98 


BOOK V 


1. Ar daybreak,! when loth to rise,? have this 
thought ready in thy mind: Jam rising for a man’s 
nork, Am I then still peevish that I am going to do 
that for which [ was born and for the sake of which 
I came into the world? Or was I made for this, that 
I should nuzzle under the bed-clothes and keep my- 
self warm? But this is pleasunter. Hast thou been 
made then for pleasure, in a word, I ask thee, to be 
acted upon or to act’ Consider each little plant, 
each tiny bird, the ant, the spider, the bee, how they 
go about their own work and de each his part for the 
building up of an orderly Universe Dost (how then 
refuse to do the work of a man? Dost thou not 
hasten to do what Nature bids thee. But some rest, 
too, is necessary. I do uot deny it. Howbeit Nature 
has set limits to this, and no less so to eating and 
drinking. Yet thou exceedest these hmits and ex- 
ceedest sufficiency. But in acts it is no longer so; 
there thou comest short of the possibility. 


iv. 6) He admits sleepiness of habit (:bid. 1. 4; v. 59), but 
says it is so cold in his bedroom that he can scarcely put his 
hands outside his bedclothes. Fronto constantly urges him 
to take more sleep (2bid. 11.5; v. 1, 2; de Fer Als. 2, Nab. 
p. 227): sleep αὐ much as afree man should! At the last he 
suffered dreadfully from insomnia, see Galen xiv. 3 (Kuhn) ; 
Dio 11. 24, § 4. 


99 


MARCOS AURELIUS 


Bo γὰρ φιλεῖς σεαυτόν" ἐπεί τοι καὶ τὴ! 
ύσιν ἄν σου καὶ τὸ βούλημα ταύτης ἐφίλεις. 
ἄλλοι δὲ τὰς τέχνας ἑαυτῶν φιλοῦντες συγ- 
κατατήκονται τοῖς κατ᾽ αὐτὰς ἔργοις ἄλουτοι 
καὶ ἄσιτοι" σὺ τὴν φύσιν τὴν σεαυτοῦ ἔλασσον 
τιμᾷς ἢ ὁ τορευτὴς τὴν τορευτικήν, ἢ ὃ ὀρχηστὴς 
τὴν ὀρχηστικήν, ἢ ὁ φιλάργυρος τὸ ἀργύριον, 
ἢ ὁ κενόδοξος τὸ δοξάριον. καὶ οὗτοι, ὅταν 
προσπαθῶσιν, οὔτε φαγεῖν οὔτε κοιμηθῆναι 
θέλουσι μᾶλλον ἢ ταῦτα συναύξειν, πρὸς ἃ 
διαφέρονται: σοὶ δὲ αἱ κοινωνικαὶ πράξεις ev- 
τελέστεραι φαίνονται καὶ ἥσσονος σπουδῆς ἄξιαι; 

ς Ὥς εὔκολον ἀπώσασθαι καὶ ἀπαλεῖψαι 
πᾶσαν φαντασίαν [τὴν] OX AN par ἢ ἀνοίκειον Kal 
εὐθὺς ἐν πάση γαλήνῃ εἶναι. 


/ 


γ. "Αξων ἑαυτὸν κρῖνε παντὸς λόγου καὶ 
ἔργου τοῦ κατὰ φύσιν: καὶ μή σε περισπάτω | ἡ 
ἐπακολουθοῦσά τίνων μέμψις ἢ λόγος, ἀλλά, εὐ 
καλὸν πεπρᾶχθαι ἢ εἰρῆσθαι, μὴ σεαυτὸν ἀπ- 
αξίου. ἐκεῖνοι μὲν yap | ἴδιον ἡγεμονικὸν ἔχουσι καὶ 
ἰδίᾳ ὁρμῇ χρῶνται" ἃ σὺ μὴ περιβλέπου, ἀλλ᾽ 
εὐθεῖαν “πέραινε ἀκολουθῶν τῇ φύσει τῇ ἰδίᾳ καὶ 
τῇ κοινῇ: μία δὲ ἀμφοτέρων τούτων ἡ ὁδός. 

δ΄. ΠΠορεύομαι διὰ τῶν κατὰ φύσιν, μέχρι 
πεσὼν ἀναπαύσομαι, ἐναποπνεύσας μὲν τούτῳ, ἐξ 
οὗ καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἀναπνέω, πεσὼν δὲ ἐπὶ τούτῳ, ἐξ 
οὗ καὶ τὸ σπερμάτιον. ὃ “πατήρ μου συνέλεξε καὶ 
τὸ αἱμάτιον ἡ μήτηρ καὶ τὸ γαλάκτιον ἡ τροφός" 


1 Cor. for παρειπάτω. 





1 em, of Marcus himself καμάτοις καὶ φροντίσι τετρυχωμένος 
(Herodvan 1. 3, δ 1) and Julian, Conriv. 407. See Plutarch’s 


100 


BOOK V 


For thou lovest not thyself, else surely hadst thou 
loved thy nature also and to do her will. But others 
who love their own art wear themselves to a shadow 
with their labours over it, forgetting to wash or take 
food.t But thou holdest thine own nature in less 
honour than the chaser of metal his art of chasing, than 
the dancer his dancing, than the miser his money- 
bags, than the popularity-hunter his little applause. 
And these, when they are exceptionally in earnest, 
are ready to forgo food and sleep, so that they 
forward the things in which they are interested. 
But dost thou deem the acts of a social being of less 
worth and less deserving of attention 3 

2. How easy a thing it is to put away and blot 
out every impression? that is disturbing or alien, 
and to be at once in perfect peace. 

3. Deem no word or deed that is in accord with 
Nature to be unworthy of thee, and be not plucked 
aside by the consequent censure of others or what 
they say,° but if a thing is good to do or say, judge 
not thyself unworthy of it For those others 
have their own ruling Reason and follow their 
own bent. Do not thou turn thine eyes aside, but 
keep to the straight path, following thy own and 
the universal Nature; and the path of these twain 
1s one.* 

4, I fare forth through all that Nature wills until 
the day when I shall sink down and rest from my 
Jabours, breathing forth my last breath into the air 
whence I daily draw it in, and falling upon that 
earth, whence also my father gathered the seed, and 
my mother the blood, and my nurse the milk ; whence 
story of Nikias the painter (de Sene Polit. 4; Non posse sien 


revere sec. ριον", 14) 2 vii, 29: vin. 47. 
4x. 11, ep, 1 St. Peter, 11. 20. Ἐπ 


Lol 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἐξ οὗ καθ᾽ ἡμέραν τοσούτοις ἔτεσι βόσκομαι, Kal 
ἀρδεύομαι, ὃ φέρει με πατοῦντα, καὶ εἰς τοσαῦτα 
ὠποχρώμενον αὐτῷ. 

ε. Δριμύτητώ σου οὐκ ἔχουσι θαυμιίσαι. 
ἔστω: ἀλλὰ ἕτερα πολλά, ἐφ᾽ ὧν οὐκ ἔχεις 
εἰπεῖν “Οὐ γὰρ πέφυκα." ἐκεῖνᾳ οὖν παρέχου, 
ἅπερ ὅλα ἐστὶν ἐπὶ σοΐ, τὸ ἀκίβδηλον, τὸ σεμνόν, 
τὸ φερέπονον, τὸ ἀφιλήδονον, τὸ ἀμεμψίέμοιρον, 
τὸ ὀλυγοδεές, τὸ εὐμενές, τὸ ἐλεύθερον, τὸ ἀπέρισ σ- 
Ο1", τὸ ἀφλύαρον, τὸ μεγαλεῖον." οὐκ aia θάνῃ 
πόσω ἤδη παρέχεσθαι δυνάμενος, ἐφ᾽ ὧν οὐδεμία 
ἀφυίας καὶ ἀνεπιτηδειότητος πρόφασις, ¢ ὅμως ἔτι 
κάτω μένεις ἑκών; ἢ καὶ γογγύζξειν, καὶ γλισ- 
χρεύεσθαι, καὶ κολακεύειν, καὶ τὸ σωμάτιον κατ- 
αἰτιῶσθαι, καὶ ἀρεσκεύεσθαι, καὶ περπερεύεσθαι, 
καὶ τοσαῦτα ῥιπτάξεσθαι τῇ ψυχῇ διὰ τὸ ἀφυῶς 
κατεσκευάσθαι ἀναγκάζῃ: οὐ, μὰ τοὺς θεούς. 
ἀλλὰ τούτων μὲν πάλαι ἀπηλλάχθαι éduvaco 
μόνον δέ, εἰ ἄρα, ὡς βραδύτερος καὶ δυσπαρ- 
ακολουθητό OTE POS καταγινώσκεσθαι: καὶ τοῦτο δὲ 
ἀσκητέον μὴ παρενθυμουμένῳ μηδὲ ἐμφιληδοῦντι 
τῇ νωθείᾳ. 
ς΄. Ὁ μέν τίς ἐστιν, ὅταν TL δεξιὸν περί τινα 
πράξῃ, πρόχειρος καὶ λογίσασθαι αὐτῷ τὴν χάριν. 
ὁ δὲ “πρὸς τοῦτο μὲν οὐ πρόχειρος, ἄλλως μέντοι 
παρ᾽ ἑαυτῷ, ὡς περὴ χρεώστου διανοεῖται καὶ 
οἶδεν, ὃ πεποίηκεν. ὁ δέ τις τρόπον τινὰ οὐδὲ 

1 ἀμεγαλεῖον Rend. 





1 vit. 67; em Fronto, ad And. i 

29. Wor, Hp. i 1 28-82. ae Oe 

tcp. Aristides, ad Rey. § 111 (Jebb) of Marcus, οὐδεμίας 
ἡδονῆς ἡττημένοο . and Fronto, de Mer, Ads. Nab. p. 225, 
rolpem fucuius ques (ibe quam voluptatem concuwavere, 
ΟΖ 


BOOK V 


daily for so many years 1 am fed and watered; 
which bears me as [ tread it under foot and make 
full use of it in a thousand ways. 

5. Sharpness of wit men cannot praise thee for} 
Granted! Yet there are many other qualities of 
which thou caust not say: J had nol that by nature. 
Well then, display those which are wholly in thy 
power, sterling sincerity, dignity, endurance of toil,® 
abstinence from pleasure. Grumble not at thy lot, 
be content with little, be kindly, independent, 
frugal, serious, high-minded. Seest thou not how 
many virtues it is in thy power to display now, in 
respect of which thou canst plead ne natural in- 
capacity or incompatibility, and yet thou art 
content still with a lower standard’ Or art thou 
forced to be discontented, to be grasping, to flatter, 
to inveigh ayainst the body, to play the toady and the 
braggart, and to be so unstable in thy soul, because 
forsooth thou hast no natural gifts? By the Gods, 
No! but long ere now couldest thou have shaken 
thyself free from all this and have lain under the 
imputation only, if it must be so, of being somewhat 
slow and dull of apprehension. And this too thou 
must amend with training and not ignore thy 
dulness or be in love with it. 

6. One man, when he has done another a kindness, 
is ready also to reckon on a return.’ A second is 
not ready to do this, but yet in his heart of hearts 
ranks the other as a debtor, and he is conscious of 
what he has done® But a third is in a manner not 

5 op. i. 5; Julian, Conrir 427. 

* Or humble, if we read ἀμεγαλεῖον, but cp. v. 9. 

7 St. Luke wi. 34; xiv. 19 

8 Sen de Benef. 1i. 6. But see the speech of Marcus to his 
soldiers (as reported by Dio, 71. 26, §2) on the revolt of Cassius 


103 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


οἶδεν, ὃ πεποίηκεν, ἀλλὰ ὅμοιός ἐστιν ἀμπέλῳ 
βότρυν ἐνεγκούσῃ καὶ μηδὲν ἄλλο προσεπι- 
ζητούσῃ μετὰ τὸ ἅπαξ τὸν ἴδιον καρπὸν ἐνηνοχ- 
EVAL, ὡς ἵππος δραμών, κύων ἰχνεύσας, μέλισσα 
μέλι ποιήσασα. ἄνθρωπος δ᾽ «ἐν» εὖ ποιήσας 
οὐκ ἐπιβοῶται, ἀλλὰ μεταβαίνει ἐφ᾽ ἕτερον, ὡς 
ἄμπελος ἐπὶ τὸ πάλιν ἐν τῇ ὥρᾳ τὸν βότρυν 
ἐνεγκεῖν. 

“Ry τούτοις οὖν δεῖ εἶναι τοῖς τρόπον τινὰ 
ἀπαρακολουθήτως αὐτὸ ποιοῦσι; ναί. “ARAN 
αὐτὸ τοῦτο δεῖ παρακολουθεῖν' ἴδιον yap 
φησὶ τοῦ κοινωνικοῦ τὸ αἰσθάνεσθαι, ὅτι 
κοινωνικῶς ἐνεργεῖ, καὶ vn Δία βούλεσθαι καὶ 
τὸν κοινωνὸν αἰσθέσθαι. ἀληθὲς μέν ἐστιν, ὃ 
λέγεις" τὸ δὲ νῦν λεγόμενον παρεκδέχῃ" διὴ 
τοῦτο ἔσῃ εἷς ἐκείνων, ὧν πρότερον ἐπεμνήσθην' 
καὶ γὰρ ἐκεῖνοι λογικῇ τινι πιθανότητι παράγον- 
ται. ἐὰν δὲ θελήσης συνεῖναι, τί ποτέ ἐστι τὸ 
λεγόμενον, μὴ φοβοῦ, μὴ παρὰ τοῦτο παραλίπης 
τι ἔργον κοινωνικὸν. 

ζ΄. Buy ᾿Αθηναίων' “Toon, ὗσον, ὦ φίλε 
Ζεῦ, κατὰ τῆς ἀρούρας τῆς ᾿Αθηναίων καὶ τῶν 


πεδίων." ἤτοι οὐ δεῖ εὔχεσθαι ἢ οὕτως ἁπλῶς 
καὶ ἐλευθέρως. 
ῃ. Ὅποϊόν τί ἐστι τὸ λεγόμενον, ὅτι “συν- 


έταξεν ὁ ᾿Ασκληπιὸς τούτῳ ἱππασίαν, ἢ ψυχρο- 
λουσίαν, ἢ ἀνυποδησίαν"᾽ τοιοῦτόν ἐστι καὶ τὸ 
συνέταξε τούτῳ ἡ τῶν ὅλων φύσις νόσον, ἢ 


1 <éy> cep. x. 8. 2 ἐπισπᾶται Ad). 





' vii. 733; ix. 42,84. ep. Pronto, de Nep. 2 ad fin. 
2x1 45 xn. 29. 
* e.g. aman who acls on the precept, ‘ Let not thy left 


TOA 


BOOK Ὶ Υ 


conscious of it, but is like the vine that has borne a 
cluster of grapes, and when it has once borne its due 
fruit looks for no reward beyond,! as it is with a 
steed when it has run its course, a hound when it has 
singled out the trail, a bee when she hath made her 
comb. And so a man when he hath done one thing 
well, does not cry it abroad, but betakes himself to a 
second,’ as a vine to bear afresh her clusters in due 
season. 

A man then must be of those who act thus as u were 
unconsciously? Aye. But surely he must be conscious 
of what he is doing, for it is, we are told, the peculiai 
attribute of the man of true social instincts to be anare 
that he puts such instincts into practices and by heaven 
lo nish that his fellow should be aware of it too. True; 
but thou misconceivest the present argument, and 
wilt consequently be of the number of those whom I 
mentioned before; for in fact thev are led astray by 
reasoning which has a plausible look. But if thou 
thinkest it worth while to understand what has been 
said, fear not that thou wilt be led thereby to neglect 
any social act. 

7. A prayer of the Athemans: Ram, Ram, O dear 
Zeus, upon the corn-land of the Athenians* and thea 
meads. Hither pray not at all, or in this simple and 
frank fashion. 

8. We have all heard, desculapius has prescribed for 
so and so riding exercise, or cold baths,> or walking bare- 
foot. Precisely so it may be said that the Universal 
Nature has prescribed for so and 50. sickness or 


hand know what thy right hand doeth,”’ must act so designedly. 
4 ep. Pausan. 1. 24, § 8. 
® See the amazing story of an iey bathe prescribed so to 
Aristides (Sucr. Serm. i. 529, Jebb ff.). 


TO5 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


3 \ δ , ω 
πήρωσιν, ἢ ἀποβολὴν ἢ ἄλλο τι τῶν τοιούτων. 
Ν ra Χ 4 bP) ω ͵ ‘4 
καὶ γὰρ ἐκεῖ TO “συνέταξε᾽ ToLlovToY TL σημαίνει" 
3 4 ΄ a e / \ ec 
ETAEE τούτῳ τοῦτο ὡς κατάλληλον πρὸς υγίιειαν" 
a Ν n / 
καὶ ἐνταῦθα τὸ συμβαῖνον ἑκάστῳ TETAKTAL πως 
3 A 7 \ \ ¢ f / 
αὐτῷ κατάλληλον πρὸς τὴν εἰμαρμένην. οὕτως 
\ or r 7} > \ tC A / ἢ 4 
yao καὶ “ cupPatve” αὐτὼ ἡμῖν λέγομεν, ὡς καὶ 
, , va) / ; 
τοὺς τετρωγώνους λίθους ἐν τοῖς τεύχεσιν ἡ ὧν 
mn 7 , ¢ “ 7 
ταῖς πυραμίσι, "συμβαίνειν οἱ τεχνῖται λέγουσι, 
f 3 7 οὶ lal 7ὔ wa 
συναρμόζοντες ἀλλήλοις TH ποιᾷ συνθέσει. ὅλως 
\ δ / \ \ ; 7 “ 
yap ἁρμονία ἐστὶ μία, καὶ ὥσπερ ἐκ πάντων τῶν 
ἕξ , “ ων “ 
σωμάτων ὁ KOTMOS τοιοῦτον σῶμα TULTANPOUTAL, 
“ 7 
οὕτως ἐκ πάντων TOV αἰτίων ἡ εἱμαρμένη τοιαύτη 
7 - mn foe 
αἰτία συμπληροῦται. νοοῦσι δέ, ὃ λέγω, καὶ οἱ 
7) ὮΣ nm \ / corms »” 9 nA» 
τέλεον ἰδιῶται" φασὶ yap, “Τοῦτο ἔφερεν αὐτῷ. 
“ “ , ων / 
οὐκοῦν τοῦτο τούτῳ ἐφέρετο, καὶ τοῦτο τούτῳ 
- , “ ἴω 
συνετάττετο. δεχώμεθα οὖν αὐτώ, ὡς ἐκεῖνα, 
a τ 9 \ / \ a \ ’ 
ἃ ο Λσκληπιὸς συντάττει. πολλὰ γοῦν καὶ ἐν 
? ’ 3 \ 7 > \ 3 4 Κι 
ἐκείνοις ἐστὶ τραχέα'' ἀλλὰ ἀσπαζόμεθα τῇ 
/ “ / 
ἐλπίδι τῆς ὑγιείας. 
“ / f ᾽ὔ 7 / 
Τοιοῦτόν τί σοι δοκείτω, ἄνυσις καὶ συντέλεια 
la) ral A f e \ ¢ 
τῶν TH κοινῇ φύσει δοκούντων, οἷον ἡ σὴ ὑγίεια: 
\ a“ Ν / q > / 
καὶ οὕτως GoTaCOU πᾶν τὸ γινόμενον, κἂν ἀπηνέστ- 
”~ \ 4 n 3 \ ω t 
ερον δοκῇ, διὰ TO ἐκεῖσε ἄγειν, ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ κόσμου 
7 \ “ N 3 ? \ 3 7 
ὑγίειαν, καὶ τὴν τοῦ Διὸς εὐοδίαν καὶ εὐπραγίαν. 
4 wn / b \ A tA 
οὐ yap ἂν τοῦτο τινι ἔφερεν, εἰ μὴ TO ὅλῳ συν- 
7 5» Ν \ ξ faa) / 7 ὰ 
epepev. οὐδὲ γὰρ ἡ τυχοῦσα ᾧύσις φέρει τι, ὃ 
Ἀ A ; 6.9 >A 7) / 2 
μὴ τῷ διοικουμένῳ UT αὐτῆς κατάλληλὸν ἐστιν. 
“- \ r / \ \ 
Οὐκοῦν κατὰ δύο λόγους στέργειν χρὴ TO 
a ft } / δ \ / 
συμβαῖνον cor καθ᾽ ἕνα μέν, OTL σοὶ ἐγίνετο, 
106 


BOOK V 


maim or loss or what not of the same kind. For, in 
the former case, prescrébed has some such meaning as 
this: He ordained this for so and so as conducive 
to his health: while in the latter what befalls each 
man has been ordained in some way as conducive 
to his destiny. For we say that things fa// do us, 
as the masons too say that the huge squared 
stones in walls and pyramids jfal/ nto their places, 
adjusting themselves harmoniously to one another 
in a sort of structural unity. For, in fine, there is 
one harmony of all things, and just as froin all 
bodies the Universe is made up into such a body as 
it is, so from all causes is Destiny made up into 
such a Cause. This is recognized by the most 
unthinking, for they say: Fate brought this on him. 
So then this was brought on this man, and _ this 
prescribed for this man. Let us then accept 
our fate, as we accept the prescriptions of Aes- 
culapius. And in fact m these, too, there arc many 
“bitter pills,’ but we welcome them in hope of 
health. 

Take much the same view of the accomplishment 
and consummation of what Nature approves as of thy 
health, and so weleome whatever happens, should it 
even be somewhat distasteful, because it contributes 
to the health of the Universe and the well-faring 
and well-doing of Zeus himself. For he had not 
brought this on a man, unless it had brought 
welfare to the Whole. For take any nature thou 
wilt, it never brings upon that which is under its 
control anything that does not conduce to its 
interests. 

For two reasons then it behoves thee to acquiesce 
in what befalls: one, that it was for thee it took 


107 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


καὶ σοὶ συνετάττετο, καὶ πρὸς σέ Tes εἶχεν, 
a > 7 
ἄνωθεν ἐκ τῶν πρεσβυτάτων αἰτίων συγ- 
, » Φ 7 ef A \ Ὁ 
«λωθόμενον' καθ᾽ ἕτερον δέ, OTL τῷ τὸ ὅλον 
διοικοῦντι τῆς εὐοδίας καὶ τῆς συντελείας 
\ \ , A ‘ol > A \ \ Δ᾽ 
καὶ νὴ Ava τῆς συμμονῆς αὐτῆς καὶ τὸ ἰδίᾳ 
εἰς ἕκαστον ἧκον aitsoy ἐστιν. πηροῦται yap 
\ f 4 ἽΝ \ e “~ , ΤΩ 
τὸ ὁλόκληρον, ἐὰν καὶ ὁτιοῦν διακόψης τῆς συν- 
“ n 
adelas Kal συνεχείας, ὥσπερ τῶν μορίων, οὕτω 
\ a f [τὰ 
δὴ καὶ τῶν αἰτίων. διακόπτεις δέ, ὅσον ἐπὶ col, 
e an ~ 
ὅταν δυσαρεστῇς, καὶ τρόπον τινὰ avaipets.} 
f \ ,ὔ \ b) Ἂ \ b 
θ΄. Μὴ σικχαίνειν μηδὲ ἀπαυδᾶν μηδὲ ἀπο- 
" \ w 7 
δυσπετεῖν, εἰ μὴ καταπυκνοῦταί σοι τὸ ἀπὸ 
4 ἴω δ ᾿ 
δογμάτων ὀρθῶν ἕκαστα πράσσειν: ἀλλὰ ἐκ- 
“ 3 Ὗ 
κρουσθέντα πάλιν ἐπανιέναι καὶ ὠσμενίξζειν, εἰ τὰ 
, b] / Ν “ a Per A 
πλείω ἀνθρωπικώτερα, καὶ φιλεῖν τοῦτο, ἐφ᾽ ὃ 
\ \ \ \ 
ἐπανέρχῃ: Kal μὴ ὡς πρὸς παιδαγωγὸν τὴν 
/ " e 3 ἴω 
φιλοσοφίαν ἐπανιέναι' ἀλλ᾽ ὡς οἱ ὀφθαλμιῶντες 
Ν Ν Ν f e f 
πρὸς TO σπογγάριον καὶ TO WOV, WS ἄλλος πρὸς 
Ν , \ 
κατάπλασμα, ὡς πρὸς καταιόνησιν. οὕτως γὰρ 
a“ ‘al 4 2 \ 
οὐδὲν ἐπιδείξῃ TO πειθαρχεῖν τῷ λόγῳ, ἀλλα 
f 3 fal , ΄ “ 
προσαναπαύσῃ αὐτῷ. μέμνησο δέ, ὅτι φιλο- 
“ f ἃ t 
σοφία μόνα θέλει, ἃ ἡ φύσις σου θέλει" σὺ δὲ 
ΧΆ , \ ’ 
ἄλλο ἤθελες οὐ κατὰ φύσιν. “Τί γὰρ τούτων 
\ ”~ 
προσηνέστερον: ἡ γὰρ ἡδονὴ οὐχὶ διὰ τοῦτο 
/ 
σφάλλει; ἀλλὰ θέασαι, εἰ προσηνέστερον μεγαλο- 
“ ’ 
ψυχία, ἐλευθερία, ἁπλότης, εὐγνωμοσύνη, 
¢ f fal Ν “ ΄ 
ὁσιότης. αὐτῆς γὰρ φρονήσεως τί προσηνέστερ- 


1 Avatpis PA, 


! Or, from cbare. 2 ep. Sen, Ap. T4. 


BOOK V 


place, and was prescribed for thee, and had reference 
in some sort to thee, bemg a_thread of destiny spun 
from the first! for thee from the most ancient causes ; 
the other, that even what befalls each individual is the 
cause of the well-faring, of the consummation? and 
by heaven of the very permanence of that which 
controls the Universe. For the perfection of the 
Whole is impaired, if thou cuttest off ever so little of 
the coherence and continuance of the Causes no less 
than of the parts. And thou dost cut them off, as 
far as lies with thee, and bring them to an end, when 
thou murmurest. 

9, Do not feel qualms® or despondency or dis- 
comfiture if thou dost not imvariably succeed in 
acting from right principles; but when thou art 
foiled,t come back again to them, and rejoice if on 
the whole thy conduct is worthy of a man, and love 
the course to which thou returnest. Come not back 
to Philosophy as to a schoolmaster, but as the sore- 
eyed to their sponges and their white of egg, as this 
patient to his plaster and that to his fomentations. 
Thus wilt thou rest satisfied with Reason, yet make 
no parade of obeying her. And forget not that Philo- 
sophy wishes but what thy nature wishes, whereas 
thy wish was for something else that accords not 
with Nature. Yes, for it would have been the acme 
of delight. Ah, is not that the very reason why 
pleasure trips us up? Nay, see if these be not more 
delightful still: high-mindedness, independence, 
simplicity, tenderness of heart,’ sanctity of life. 
Why what is more delightful than wisdom herself, 


3 Lit. be nauseated (cp. vin. 24). ἥν, 36. 
§ Galen xii. 17 (Kuhn) calls Marcus εὐγνώμων, μέτριος, 
ἥμερος, πρᾶος. 


109 


bo 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


vl; ὅταν TO ἄπταιστον, καὶ εὔρουν ἐν πᾶσι τῆς 
παρακολουθητικῆς καὶ ἐπιστημονικῆς δυνάμεως 
ἐνθυμηθῆς. 

“. Ta μὲν πράγματα ἐν τοιαύτῃ τρόπον τινὰ 
ἐγκαλύψει ἐστίν, ὥστε φιλοσόφοις οὐκ ὀλίγοις 
οὐδὲ τοῖς τυχοῦσιν ἔδοξε, παντάπασιν ἀκατά- 
ληπτα εἶναι: πλὴν αὐτοῖς γε τοῖς Στωικοῖς 
δυσκατάληπτα δοκεῖ" καὶ πᾶσα ἡ ἡμετέρα συγ- 
κατάθεσις μεταπτωτή: ποῦ γὰρ ὁ ἀμετάώπτωτος; 
μέτιθι τοίνυν ἐπ᾿ αὐτὰ τὰ ὑποκείμενα, ὡς ὀλιγό- 
χρονὰ καὶ εὐτελῆ καὶ δυνάμενα ἐν κτήσει 
κιναίδου ἢ πόρνης ἢ λῃστοῦ εἶναι. μετὰ τοῦτο 
ἔπιθι ἐπὶ τὰ τῶν συμβιούντων ἤθη, ὧν μόλις 
ἐστὶ καὶ τοῦ χαριεστάτου ἀνασχέσθαι, ἵνα μὴ 
λέγω, ὅτε καὶ ἑαυτόν TLS μόγις ὑπομένει. 

Ἔν τοιούτῳ οὖν ξύόφῳ καὶ ῥύπῳ καὶ τοσαύτῃ 
ῥύσει τῆς τε οὐσίας καὶ τοῦ χρόνου, καὶ τῆς 
κινήσεως καὶ τῶν κινουμένων, τί ποτ᾽ ἐστὶ 
τὸ ἐκτιμηθῆναι ἢ τὸ ὅλως σπουδασθῆναι 
δυνώμενον, οὐδ᾽ ἐπινοῶῷ. τοὐναντίον yap δεῖ 
παραμυθούμενον ἑαυτὸν περιμένειν τὴν φυσικὴν 
λύσιν, καὶ μὴ ἀσχάλλειν τῇ διατριβῇ, ὠλλὰ 
τούτοις μόνοις προσαναπαύεσθαι: ἑνὶ μὲν τῷ, 
ὅτι οὐδὲν συμβήσεταί μοι, ὃ οὐχὶ κατὰ τὴν 
τῶν ὅλων φύσιν ἐστίν: ἑτέρῳ δέ, ὅτι ἔξεστί μοι 
μηδὲν πράσσειν παρὰ τὸν ἐμὸν θεὸν καὶ δαίμονα. 
οὐδεὶς yap ὁ ἀναγκάσων τοῦτον παραβῆναι. 

ια΄. “" [Πρὸς τί ποτε ἄρα νῦν χρῶμαι τῇ ἐμαυτοῦ 
ψυχῆ; παρ᾽ ἕκαστα τοῦτο ἐπανερωτᾶν ἑαυτόν, 





1 vi, 34. cp. Sen. Hp. 81. 


2 iv. 50; 1x. 3. For a qualifying picture to this very 
pessimistic view see vi. 48. 


110 


BOOK VY 


when thou thinkest how sure and smooth in all 
its workings is the faculty of understanding and 
knowledge ? 

10. T hings are ina sense so wrapped up in mystery 
that uot a few philosophers, and they no ordinary 
ones, have concluded that they are wholly beyond 
our comprehension ἢ nay, even the Stoics themselves 
find them hard to comprehend. Indeed every 
assent we give to the impressions of our senses is 
hable to error, for where is the man who never errs? 
Pass on then to the objective things themselves, how 
transitory they are, how worthless, the property, 
quite possibly, of a boy-minion, a harlot, or a brigand.} 
After that turn to the characters of thine associates, 
even the most refined of whom it is dificult to put up 
with, let alone the fact that a man has enough to do 
to endure himself.? 

What then there can be amid such murk and 
nastiness, and in so ceaseless an ebbing of substance 
and of time, of movement and things moved, that 
deserves to be greatly valued or to excite our ambition 
in the least, I cannot even conceive. On the 
contrary, a man should take heart of grace to await his 
natural dissolution, and without any chafing at delay 
comfort ὃ himself with these twin thoughts alone: the 
one, that nothing will befall me that is not in accord 
with the Nature of the Universe; the other, that it 
is in my power to do nothing contrary to the God 
and the ‘genius’ ὁ within me. For no one can force 
me to disobey that. 

11. 70 what use then am 1 putting my soul? Never 
fail to ask thyself this question and to cross-examine 


3 A favourite word. cp. iv. 81; v. 9=‘‘ to take rest in.” 
441.13; 111. 5 etc, 
TII 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


καὶ ἐξετάζειν, τί μοί ἐστε νῦν ἐν τούτῳ τῷ μορίῳ, 

ὃ δὴ ἡγεμονικὸν καλοῦσι; καὶ τίνος ἄρα νῦν ἔχω 
ψυχήν; μήτι παιδίου; μήτι μειρακίου; μήτι 

f 

γυναικαρίου; μήτε τυράννου; μήτι κτήνους; 
μήτι θηρίου; 

ιβΓ. ΟὉποῖά τινά ἐστι τὰ τοῖς πολλοῖς 
δοκοῦντα ἀγαθά, κἂν ἐντεῦθεν λάβοις. εἰ γάρ 
TLS ἐπινοήσειεν ὑπάρχοντά τινὰ ὡς ἀληθῶς 
ἀγαθά, οἷον φρόνησιν, σωφροσύνην, δικαιοσύνην, 
ἀνδρίαν, οὐκ ἂν ταῦτα T POETLVON TAS ἔτε ἀκοῦσαι 
δυνηθείη τὸ “Uo τῶν ἀγαθῶν" "1 οὐ γὰρ ἐφαρ- 
μόσει. τὰ δέ γε τοῖς πολλοῖς φαινόμενα ἀγαθὰ 
προεπινοήσας τις, ἐξακούσεται καὶ ῥᾳδίως δέξεται, 
ὡς οἰκείως ἐπελεγόμενον τὸ ὑπὸ τοῦ κωμικοῦ 
εἰρημένον. οὕτως καὶ οἱ πολλοὶ φαντάζονται τὴν 
διαφοράν. οὐ γὰρ ἂν τοῦτο μὲν οὖν “ προσ- 
ἔκοπτε καὶ ἀπηξιοῦτο' τὸ δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ πλούτου 
καὶ τῶν πρὸς τρυφὴν ἢ δόξαν. εὐκληρημάτων 
παρεδεχόμεθα ὡς ἱκνουμένως καὶ ἀστείως εἰρη- 
μένον. πρόιθιε οὖν καὶ ἐρώτα, εἰ τιμητέον καὶ 
ἀγαθὰ ὑποληπτέον τὰ τοιαῦτα, ὧν προεπινοη- 
θέντων οἰκείως ἂν ἐπιφέροιτο τὸ τὸν κεκτημένον 
αὐτὰ ὑπὸ τῆς εὐπορίας ‘ οὐκ ἔχειν, ὅποι χέσῃ. 
ty’. Ἔξ αἰτιώδους καὶ ὑλικοῦ συνέστηκα' 
οὐδέτερον δὲ τούτων εἰς τὸ μὴ ὃν φθαρήσεται, 


1 σὶ ὑπὸ τῷ ἀγαθῷ : τὸ Morus: τῶν ἀγαθῶν Nauck. 
2 οὖν Lofft for οὐ: Rendall keeps οὐ and translates 
‘would not fail to shock.” 





1 se, as in the case of things really good. 
* From Menander frag. 530 (Kock). The substitution of 
πτύσῃ for χέσῃ would mitigate the coarseness of the phrase, 


112 


BOOK V 


thyself thus: What relation lave 1 to this part of 
me which they call the rulmg Reason? And whose 
Soul have I got now? ‘The Soul ot a child? Of 
a youth? Of a woman? Of a tyrant? Of a 
domestic animal? Of a wild beast? — 

12. What are counted as good things in the estim- 
ation of the many thou canst gather even from this. 
For if a man fix his mind upon certain things as really 
and unquestionably good, such as wisdom, temper- 
ance, justice, manliness, with this preconception in 
his mind he could no longer bear to listen to the 
poet’s, By reason of iis wealth of goods ; for it 
would not apply. But, if a man first fix his mind 
upon the things which appear good to the multi- 
tude, he will listen and readily accept as aptly 
added the quotation from the Comic Poet. In 
this way even the multitude have a perception of 
the difference. For otherwise this jest would 
not! offend and be repudiated, while we accept 
it as appropriately and wittily said of wealth and 
of the advantages which wait upon luxury and 
popularity. Go on, then, and ask whether we should 
prize and count as good those things, with which 
first fixed in our mind we might germanely quote 
of their possessor, that for his very wealth of goods 
he has no place to ease himself in? 

13. I am made up of the Causal 8 and the Material, 
and neither of these disappears into nothing, just 


and we might then cp. Diog Laert. Diog. 6 and Avisé. 4, 
passages in which we are told that the philosopher being taken 
to a magnificent house where spitting was forbidden spat in 
his host’s face, explaining that he could find no other place. 

3 The Efficient, or Formal, or Formative principle, here 
the Soul, but the Soul itself consists of a causal element 
(νοῦς) and a material (τὸ πνευμάτιον). 


i 


MAKCUS AURELIUS 


ὥσπερ οὐδὲ ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος ὑπέστη. οὐκοῦν 
Karate χθήσεται, πᾶν μέρος ἐμὸν κωτὰ μεταβολὴν 
εἰς μέρος TL τοῦ κόσμου, καὶ πάλιν ἐκεῖνο εἰς 
ἕτερον μέρος τι τοῦ κόσμου μεταβαλεῖ, καὶ ἤδη 
εἰς ἄπειρον. κατὰ τοιαύτην δὲ μεταβολὴν κἀγὼ 
e f Χ 2 \ 2 ‘a 
ὑπέστην καὶ οἱ ἐμὲ γεννήσαντες, Kal ἐπανιόντι 
εἰς ἄλλο ἄπειρον. οὐδὲν γὰρ κωλύει οὕτως 
φάναι, κἂν κατὰ περιόδους πεπερασμῴνας ὁ 
κόσμος διοικῆται. 
t LaF a , \ e \ ὔ 7 

' ιδ΄. | O λόγος καὶ ἡ λογικὴ τέχνη δυνάμεις 
εἰσὶν ἑαυταῖς ἀρκούμεναι καὶ τοῖς καθ᾽ ἑαυτὰς 
ἔργοις. ὁρμῶνται μὲν οὖν ἀπὸ τῆς οἰκείας 
ἀρχῆς, ὁδεύουσι δὲ εἰς τὸ προκείμενον τελος' 
καθ᾽ ὃ κατορθώσεις αἱ τοιαῦται πράξεις ὀνομάζ- 
ονται τὴν ὀρθότητα τῆς ὁδοῦ σημαίνουσαι. 

te. Οὐδὲν τούτων ῥητέον ἀνθρώπου, ἃ ἀν- 
θρώπῳ, καθὸ ἄνθρωπός ἐστιν, οὐκ ἐπιβάλλει. 
οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπαυτήματα ἀνθρώπον, οὐδὲ ἐπαγγέλλ.- 
ετῶι αὐτὰ ἡ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου φύσις, οὐδὲ τελειό- 
τητές εἰσι τῆς τοῦ ἀνθρώπου φύσεως. οὐ τοίνυν 
οὐδὲ τὸ τέλος ἐν αὐτοῖς ἐστι τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ κείμ- 
ἐνον, οὐδέ γε τὸ συμπληρωτικὸν τοῦ τέλους, τὸ 
ἀγαθόν. ἔτι εἴ τι τούτων ἣν ἐπιβάλλον τῷ 
ἀνθρώπῳ, οὐκ ἂν τὸ ὑπερφρονεῖν αὐτῶν καὶ κατ- 
εξανίστασθαι ἐπιβάλλον ἣν, οὐδὲ ἐπαινετὸς ἣν 
0 ἀπροσδεῇ τούτων Ea τὑτὸν παρεχόμενος" οὐδ᾽ ἂν 
ὁ ἐλαττωτικὸς ἑαυτοῦ ἔν τινε τούτων ἀγαθὸς ἣν, 
εἴπερ ταῦτα ἀγαθὰ ἣν. νῦν δέ, ὅσῳπερ πλείω 
τίς ἀφαιρῶν ἑαυτοῦ τούτων ἢ τοιούτων ἑτέρων 
ἢ καὶ ἀφαιρούμενός τὸ τούτων ἀνέχηται, τοσῷδε 
μᾶλλον ἀγαθός ἐστιν. 

i’. Οἷα ἂν πολλάκις φαντασθῆς, τοιαύτη σοι 


114 


BOOK \ 


as neither did it come intu existence out of nothing. 
So shall my every part by change be told off! to 
form sume part of the Universe, “and that again be 
changed into another part of it, and so on to infinity. 
lt was by such process of chanye that I too came into 
being and my parents, and so backwards into a secoud 
infimity. And the statement is quite legitimate, even 
if the Universe be arranged according to completed 
eycles.? 

14. Reason and the art of reasoning are in thein- 
selves and in their own proper acts scli-sufficing 
fuculties Staring trom a principle peeuhar to them, 
they jourmey on to the end set before them. Where- 
fore such actions ure termed ae acis, as signifying 
that they follow the right wa 

15. Call none of those εἰ τῆς ἃ man’s that do not 
fall to him as man. They cannot be claimed of 
aman; the man’s nature docs not guarantee them ; 
they are no consuiamations of that nature. Conse- 
quently neither is the end for which man lives placed 
in these things, nor yet that which is perfective of the 
end, namely The Good. Moreover, if anv of these 
things did fall to a man, it would not fall to him 
to contemn them and set his face against them, 
nor would a man be commendable who shewed 
himself ΕἸ Ἐπ αὶ of these things, nor vet would he 
be a good man who came short of his own standard 
in any of them, if so be these thmgs were good. 
But as it is, the more a man can δ himself “free, 
or even be set free, from these and other such 
things with equanimity, by so much the more is he 
good. 

16. The character of thy mind will be such as is 


ἘΠ 80 . 32; xi 1. See Index ΠῚ, (περίοδοι) 
115 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἔσται ἡ διάνοια" βάπτεται γὰρ ὑπὸ τῶν φαντασ- 
ιἰῶν ἡ ψυχή. βάπτε οὖν αὐτὴν τῇ συνεχείᾳ 
τῶν τοιούτων φαντασιῶν' οἷον ὅτι, ὅπου ζῆν 
ἐστιν, ἐκεῖ καὶ εὖ ζῆν: ἐν αὐλῇ δὲ ζῆν ἐστιν" 
ἔστιν ἄρα καὶ εὖ ζῆν ἐν αὐλῇ. καὶ πάλιν ὅτι 
οὗπερ ἕνεκεν ἕκαστον κατεσκεύασται, [πρὸς ὃ 
δὲ κατεσκεύασται “| πρὸς τοῦτο φέρεται: πρὸς 
ὃ φέρεται δέ, ἐν τούτῳ τὸ τέλος αὐτοῦ' ὅπου δὲ 
τὸ τέλος, ἐκεῖ καὶ τὸ συμφέρον καὶ τὠγαθὸν 
ἑκάστου: τὸ ἄρα ἀγαθὸν τοῦ λογικοῦ ξῴου 
/ ef Ν \ 7 ΄ 

κοινωνία. OTL γὰρ πρὸς κοινωνίαν γεγόναμεν, 
πάλαι δέδεικται. ἢ οὐκ ἣν ἐναργὲς ὅτε τὰ 
χείρω τῶν κρειττόνων ἕνεκεν, τὰ δὲ κρείττω 
ἀλλήλων; κρείττω δὲ τῶν μὲν ἀψύχων τὰ 
ἔμψυχα, τῶν δὲ ἐμψύχων τὰ λογικά. 

ic. “To τὰ ἀδύνατα διώκειν μανικόν" ἀδύνατ- 
ον δὲ τὸ τοὺς φαύλους μὴ τοιαῦτά τινα ποιεῖν. 

ιη΄. Οὐδὲν οὐδενὶ συμβαίνει, ὃ οὐχὶ πέφυκε 
φέρειν. ἄλλῳ τὰ αὐτὰ συμβαίνει καὶ roe 
ἀγνοῶν, ὅτι συμβέβηκεν, ἢ ἐπιδεικνύμενος μεγαλο- 
φροσύνην εὐσταθεῖ καὶ ἀκάκωτος μένει. δεινὸν 
οὖν ἄγνοιαν καὶ ἀρέσκειαν ἰσχυροτέρας εἶναι 
φρονήσεως. 

ιθ΄. Τὰ πράγματα. αὐτὰ οὐδ᾽ ὁπωστιοῦν 
ψυχῆς ἅπτεται, οὐδὲ ἔχει εἴσοδον πρὸς ψυχήν, 
οὐδὲ τρέψαι οὐδὲ κινῆσαι ψυχὴν δύναται" τρέπει 

1 The words in brackets omitted by A, which however adds 


δὲ after τοῦτο. After the first carer. Cat. inserts πρὸς τοῦτο 
κατεσκεύασται. 





1 νὰ, 3; Sen. Hy. 95. a ᾿ νυ, 9, cp. Sen. Lp, 98, 
3 ii. 13 i. 4, 81, i. 1. 
Foy BOF xi, 18) $15 = Hp. 65 ad fin. 


116 


BOOK V 


the character of thy frequent thoughts,! for the 
soul takes its dye from the thoughts. Dye her 
then with a continuous succession of such thoughts 
as these: Where life is possible, there it is possible 
also to live well.—But the life is life in a Court.2 Well, 
in a Court too it is possible to live well. And again: 
A thing is drawn towards that for the sake of which it 
has been made, and its end lies in that towards which 
it is drawn and, where its end lies, there lie also its 
interest and its good. The Good, then, for a rational 
creature is fellowship with others? For it has been 
made clear long ago* that we were constituted for 
fellowship. Or was it not obvious that the lower 
were for the sake of the higher® and the higher for 
the sake of one another? And living things are 
higher than lifeless,° and those that have reason than 
those that have hfe only. 

17. To crave impossibilities 1s lunacy; but it is 
impossible for the wicked to act otherwise.’ 

18. Nothing befalls anyone that he is not fitted 
by nature to bear.S Others experience the same 
things as thou, but either from ignorance that 
anything has befallen them, ocr to manifest. ther 
greatness of mind, they stand firm and get no hurt. 
A strange thing indeed that ignorance and vanity 
should prove stronger than wisdom 19 

19. Things of themselves cannot take the least 
hold of the Soul, nor have any access to her, nor 
deflect or move her: ; but the Soul alone deflects 


® ep, Chrysippus : τὸ ζῷον τοῦ μὴ ζῴου κρεῖττον. 

Τν. 6; vin. 713 xi. 18 ad fin. ; Sen. de Ira u. 8]. 

8 viil. 46 ; x. 3; St. Paul, 1 Cor. x. 13. 

S ep Sen. Hp. 36 αὐ fin. tun pissimam si cam securitatemn 
nobis rulio non praestat, ad quam stultitea perducit, 


{17 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


δὲ Kal κινεῖ αὐτὴ ἑαυτὴν μόνη, καὶ οἵων ἂν 
κριμάτων καταξιώσῃ ἑαυτήν, τοιαῦτα ἑαυτῇ ποιεῖ 
τὰ προσυφεστῶτα. 

κ΄. Kad ἕτερον μὲν λόγον ἡμῖν ἐστιν οἰκειό- 
τατον ἄνθρωπος, καθ᾽ ὅσον εὖ ποιητέον αὐτοὺς 
καὶ ἀνεκτέον: καθ᾽ ὅσον δὲ ἐνίστανταί τινες εἰς 
τὰ οἰκεῖα ἔργα, ἕν τι τῶν ἀδιαφόρων μοι γίνεται 
ὁ ἄνθρωπος οὐχ ἧσσον ἢ) ἥλιος ἢ ἄνεμος ἢ 
θηρίον. ὑπὸ τούτων δὲ ἐνέργεια μέν τίς ἐμποδ- 
ἐισθείη ἄν: ὁρμῆς δὲ καὶ διαθέσεως οὐ γίνεται 
ἐμπόδια διὰ τὴν ὑπεξαίρεσιν καὶ τὴν περι- 
τροπήν. περιτρέπει γὰρ καὶ μεθίστησι πᾶν τὸ 
τῆς “ἐνεργείας, κώλυμα ἡ διάνοια εἰς τὸ προ- 
ηγούμενον' καὶ πρὸ ἔργου γίνεται τὸ τοῦ ἔργου 
τούτου ἐφεκτικόν: καὶ πρὸ ὁδοῦ τὸ τῆς ὁδοῦ 
ταύτης ἐνστατικόν. 

κα΄. Τῶν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ τὸ κράτιστον τίμα" 
ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο τὸ πᾶσι χρώμενον καὶ πώντα 
διέπον. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐν σοὶ τὸ κράτιστον 
τίμα: ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο τὸ ἐκείνῳ ὁμογενές. καὶ γὰρ 
ἐπὶ σοῦ τὸ τοῖς ἄλλοις χρώμενον τοῦτό ἐστι, καὶ 
ὁ σὸς Bios ὑπὸ τούτου διοικεῖται. 

κβ΄. “O τῇ πόλει οὐκ ἔστι βλαβερόν, οὐδὲ 
τὸν πολίτην βλάπτει. ἐπὶ πάσης τῆς τοῦ 
βεβλάφθαι φαντασίας τοῦτον ἔπαγε τὸν κανόνα" 
εἰ ἡ πόλις ὑπὸ τούτου μὴ βλάπτεται, οὐδὲ ἐγὼ 
βέβλαμμαι: εἰ δὲ ἡ πόλις βλάπτεται, οὐκ 
ὀργιστέον τῷ βλάπτοντι τὴν πόλιν. τί τὸ 
παρορώμενον; " 


1 More correctly αὐτόν. “ se. ἀλλὰ Scinréov before τί Gat. 


----- πος. 00... ὕὕ.ὕ.-ὄ.......ὲὕθ00ὄ.- -----.ς........ .9Θ0 0ὕὕᾧ.ς.-----.. τ Ὅὑὕὑὕ00ἀἱοροο 0 00ὑ0ὁὍ0ῪΣὺΔὡΔἁὅΨοςς... 





ἐν, 8. 2 xi. 16. iv. 1; vi. 50. 


τεῦ 


BOOK V 


and moves herself!) and whatever judgments she 
deems it right to form, in conformity with them she 
fashions for herself the things that submit themselves 
to her from without.” 

20. In one respect a man 15 of very close concern 
Lo us, in so far as we must do him good and forbear ; 
but in so far as any stand in the way of those acts 
which concern us closely, then man becomes for me 
as much one of things indifferent as the sun, as the 
wind, as a wild-beast. Though a man may in some 
sort fetter my activity, yet on my own initiahive and 
mental attitude no fetters can be put because of the 
power they possess of condiucnal action® and of 
adaptation to circumstances. For everything that 
stands in the way of its activity is adapted and 
transmuted by the mind into a furtherance of it,* 
and that which is a check on this action is converted 
into a help to it, and that which is a hmdrance in 
our path goes but to make it casier. 

21. Prize the most excellent thing in the Universe ; 
and this is that which utilizes all things and controls 
all things. Prize in like manner the most excellent 
thing in thyself;® and this is that which is akin to 
the other. For this, which utilizes all else is in thee 
Loo, and by it thy life is governed. 

32. That which is not hurtful to the community 
cannot hurt the individual.6 Test every case of 
apparent hurt by this rule: if the community be not 
hurt by this, neither am 1 hurt; but if the com- 
munity be hurt, there is no need to be angry~ 
with him that hath done the hurt,’ but to enquire, 
What hath he seen amiss ἢ ὃ 
vi. 16 ad fin. 


tiv bl; x 31 ad jin. 
Sle 19, 


ὦν, 85, v.54. ἵν, 80. 


a 
hs 


[19 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


KY Πολλάκις ἐνθυμοῦ τὸ τάχος τῆς παρα- 
φορᾶς καὶ ὑπεξαγωγῆς τῶν ὄντων καὶ γινομένων. 
ἥ τε γὰρ οὐσία οἷον ποταμὸς ἐν διηνεκεῖ ῥύσει" 
καὶ αἱ ἐνέργειαι ἐν συνεχέσι μεταβολαῖς, καὶ τὰ 
αἴτια ἐν μυρίαις τροπαῖς, καὶ σχεδὸν οὐδὲν ἑ ἑστώς, 
καὶ ἡ τὸ πάρεγγυς τόδε ἄπειρον τοῦ " παρῳχη- 
κότος T καὶ μέλλοντος ἀχανές, ᾧ πάντα ἐναφαν- 
ίξεται. πῶς οὖν οὐ μωρὸς ὁ ἐν τούτοις φυσώμενος 
ἢ σπώμενος ἢ σχετλιάζων + ὡς ἔν τινε χρόνῳ καὶ 
ἐπὶ μωκρὸν «ἂν» ἐνοχλήσαντι; ita 

κδ΄, Μέμνησο τῆς συμπάσης οὐσίας, ἧς ὀλίγ- 
ἐστον μετέχεις" καὶ τοῦ σύμπαντος αἰῶνος, οὗ 
βραχὺ καὶ ἀκαριαῖόν σοι διάστημα ἀφώρισται" 
καὶ τῆς εἱμαρμένης, ἧς πόστον εἰ μέρος; 

κε. ἴΑλλος ἁμαρτάνει τι εἰς ἐμέ; ὄψεται' 
ἰδίαν ἐ ἔχει διάθεσιν, ἰδίαν ἐνέργειαν. ἐγὼ νῦν ἔχω, 
ὅ με θέλει νῦν ἔχειν ἡ κοινὴ φύσις, καὶ πράσσω, ὃ 
με νῦν πράσσειν θέλει ἡ ἐμὴ φύσις. 

κε΄. Τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν καὶ κυριεῦον τῆς ψυχῆς 
σου μέρος ἄτρεπτον ἔστω ὑπὸ THs ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ 
λείας ἢ τραχείας κινήσεως: καὶ μὴ συγκριν- 
έσθω, ἀλλὰ περιγραφέτω ἑαυτὸ καὶ περιοριζέτον 
τὰς πείσεις ἐκείνας ἐν τοῖς μορίοις. ὅταν δὲ 
ἀναδιδῶνται κατὰ τὴν ἑτέραν +3 συμπάθειαν εἰς 
τὴν διάνοιαν, ὡς ἐν σώματι ἡνωμένῳ, τότε πρὸς 
μὲν τὴν αἴσθησιν φυσικὴν οὖσαν οὐ πειρατέον 
ἀντιβαίνειν, τὴν δὲ ὑπόληψιν τὴν ὡς περὶ ἀγαθοῦ 
ἢ κακοῦ μὴ προστιθέτω τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ. 

1 τοῦ te PA. 

* μικρὸν P: ἐνοχλήσοντι Loflt: ἐνοχλῆσαν τι Fournier. 

The tuture sense seems required. 


ὁ ἑτέρων < érépois> Schenkl: μερῶν Rend. (ep. Sext. mp. 
adv, Alath. ix, 80): ἡμετέραν Rich, 


[20 


BOOK V 


23. Think often on the swiftness with which the 
things that exist and that are coming into existence 
are swept past us and carried out of sight. For all 
substance ! is as a river in ceaseless flow,? its activities 
ever changing and its causes subject to countless 
variations, and scarcely anything stable; and ever 
beside us is this infinity of the past and yawning 
abyss of the future, wherein all things are dis- 
appearing? Is he not senseless who in such an 
environment puffs himself up, or is distracted, or 
frets as over a trouble lasting and far-reaching? 

24. Keep in memory the universal Substance, of 
which thou art a tiny part; and universal Time, of 
which a brief, nay an almost momentary span has 
been allotted thee; and Destiny, in which how 
fractional thy share? + 

25. Another does me some wrong? He shall see 
to it. His disposition is his own, his activities are 
his own. What the universal Nature wills me to 
have now, that I now have, and what my nature 
wills me now to do, that I do. 

26. Let the ruling and master Reason of thy soul 
be proof against any motions in the flesh smooth or 
rough. Let it not mingle itself with them, but 
isolate and restrict those tendencies to their true 
spheres. But when in virtue of that other sympathetic 
connection these tendencies grow up into the mind 
as is to be expected in a single organism, then 
must thou not go about to resist the sensation, 
natural as it is, but see that thy ruling Reason 
adds no opinion of its own as to whether such is 
good or bad. 

1 Or, Being. 2 iv. 43; vii. 19. ὁ χῃ 80, 
Ὁ τρια, ἃ, 12,26. 5. St. Matt, sun. +, 24. 
Γ2Ὶ 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


κζ΄. Συζῆν θεοῖς. συζῇ δὲ θεοῖς ὁ συνεχῶς 
δεικνὺς αὐτοῖς τὴν ἑαυτοῦ ψυχὴν a ἀρεσκομένην μὲν 
τοῖς ἀπονεμομένοις, ποιοῦσαν δέ, ὃ ὅσα βούλεται 0 
δαίμων, ὃν ἑκάστῳ προστώτην καὶ ἡγεμόνα ὁ 
Ζεὺς ἔδωκεν, ἀπόσπασμα ἑαυτοῦ. οὗτος δέ ἐστιν 
ὁ ἑκάστου νοῦς καὶ λόγος. 

ky. Τῷ γράσωνι μήτι ὀργίζῃ; μήτι τῷ ὀζο- 
στόμῳ ὀργίξῃ; τί σοι ποιήσει; τοιοῦτον στόμα 
ἔχει, τοιαύτας μάλας ἐ ἔχει: ἀνάγκη τοιαύτην ὠπο- 
φορὰν ὁ ἀπὸ τοιούτων γίνεσθαι. ONAN ὃ ἄνθρωπος 
λόγον ἔχει, φησί, καὶ δύναται συννοεῖν ἐφ- 
Lot avo, τί πλημμελεῖ." εὖ got γένοιτο" ToLyap- 
οῦν καὶ σὺ λόγον ἔχεις" κίνησον λογικῇ διαθέσει 
λογικὴν διάθεσιν, δεῖξον, ὑπόμνησον. εἰ γὰρ 
ἐπαίει, θεραπεύσεις, καὶ οὐ χρεία ὀργῆς. 

Οὔτε τραγῳδὸς οὔτε πόρνη. 

κθ΄. Ὥς ἐξελθὼν ξῆν διανοῇ, οὕτως ἐνταῦθα 
ζῆν ἔξεστιν. ἐὰν δὲ "μὴ ἐπιτρέπωσι, τότε καὶ τοῦ 
ζῆν ἔξιθι: οὕτως μέντοι, ὡς μηδὲν κακὸν πάσχων. 
“ἹΚΚαπνός, καὶ ἀπέρχομαι. τί αὐτὸ πρᾶγμα 
δοκεῖς; μέχρι δέ με τοιοῦτον οὐδὲν ἐξάγει, μένω 
ἐλεύθερος, καὶ οὐδείς με κωλύσει ποιεῖν ἃ θέλω: 
θέλω δὲ " κατὰ φύσιν τοῦ λογικοῦ καὶ κοινωνικοῦ 
ζῴου. 

λ΄. Ὁ τοῦ ὅλου νοῦς κοινωνικός. πεποίηκε 
γοῦν τὰ χείρω τῶι κρευττόνων ἕνεκεν" καὶ τὰ 
Κρείτυν ω ἀχλήλοις συνήρμοσεν. ὁρᾷς, πῶς ὑπέταξε, 
συνέταξε, καὶ τὸ κατ᾽ ἀξίαν ἀπένειμεν ἑκάστοις 

1 φύσει AD. A «πὸ 
hay], 4; x1. 26, 30. 


2 Epict. i. 14, § 12 ἐπίτροπον ἑκάστῳ παρέστησε (sc. Zeus) 
τὸν ἑκάστου δαίμονα καὶ παρέδωκε φυλάσσειν αὐτὸν αὐτῷ. 


122 





BOOK V 


27. Walk with the Gods! And he does walk with 
the Gods, who lets them see his soul invariably 
satisfied with its lot and carrying out the will of that 
‘ venius,’ a particle! of himself, which Zeus has given 
to every man as his captain and guide ’—and this is 
none other than each man’s intelligence and reason. 

28. If a man’s armpits are unpleasant, art thou 
angry with him? If he has foul breath? What 
would be the use? The man has such a mouth, he 
has such armpits. Some such effuvium was bound 
to come from such a source. Bul the man has sense, 
quotha! FFeath a hille attention he could see wherein he 
offends. Ucongratulate thee! Well, thou too hast 
sense. By a rational attitude, then, in thyself evoke 
a rational attitude in him,® enlighten him, adinonish 
him If he listen, thou shait cure him,* and have no 
need of anger. 

Neither tragedian nor harlot 

29. Thou canst live on earth as thou dost purpose 
to live when departed. But if men will not have 
it so, then 1s it time for thee even to go out of life, 
yet not as one who is treated ill “Fes smoky and I go 
away.6 Why think it a great matter? But while 
no such cause drives me forth, I remain a free man, 
and none shall prevent me from doing what 1 will, 
and I will what is in accordance with the nature of a 
rational and social creature. 

30. The intelligence of the Universe is social. 
It hath at any rate made the lower things for the 
suke of the higher, and it adapted the higher‘ 
to one another. Thou seest how it hath sub- 
ordinated, coordinated, and given each its due lot 


$x 4; Epict. τι. ὃ, §11 + ep, St. Matt. xvin. 15. 
> Ὧ 66 ΟἿ 11. 1. ep. νη]. 47. 
» Hpict. i. 25, 8 18; ιν. 10, § 27. Ty, 16. 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


καὶ τὰ κρατιστεύοντα εἰς ὁμόνοιαν ἀλλήλων 
συνήγαγεν. 

λα΄. Πῶς προσενήνεξαι μέχρι vov θεοῖς, γον- 
εῦσιν, ἀδελφοῖς, γυναικί, τέκνοις, διδασκάλοις, 
τροφεῦσι, φίλοις, οἰκείοις, οἰκέταις ; εἰ πρὸς 

7 
πάντας σοι “εχρῖ νῦν ἐστι τὸ 

᾿ς Μήτε τινὰ ῥέξαι ἐξαίσιον, μήτε «τι!» εἰπεῖν." " 
ἀναμιμνήσκου δὲ καὶ ov οἵων διελήλυθας καὶ 
οἷα ἤρκεσας ὑπομεῖναι. καὶ ὅτι πλήρης ἤδη σοι 
ἡ ἱστορία τοῦ βίου καὶ τελευτᾷ ° ὴ λειτουργία' 
καὶ πόσα ὦπται καλά, καὶ πόσων μὲν ἡδονῶν 
καὶ πόνων ὑπερεῖδες, πόσα δὲ ἔνδοξα παρεῖδες, 
εἰς ὅσους δὲ ἀγνώμονας εὐγνώμων ἐγένου. 

λβ΄. Διὰ τί συγχέουσιν ἄτεχνοι καὶ ἀμαθεῖς 
ψυχαὶ ἔντεχνον καὶ ἐπιστήμονα; τίς οὖν Ψυχὴ 
ἔντεχνος καὶ ἐπιστήμων; ἡ εἰδυΐα ἀρχὴν καὶ 
τέλος, καὶ τὸν δι᾽ ὅλης τῆς οὐσίας διήκοντα λόγον 
καὶ διὰ παντὸς τοῦ αἰῶνος κατὰ περιόδους τεταγ- 
μένας οἰκονομοῦντα τὸ πᾶν. 

λγ΄. Ὅσον οὐδέπω σποδὸς ἢ σκελετός, καὶ 
ἤτοι ὄνομα ἢ οὐδὲ ὄνομα: τὸ δὲ ὄνομα ψόφος καὶ 
ἀπήχημα.. τὰ δὲ ἐ ἐν τῷ βίῳ πολυτίμητα κενὰ καὶ 
σαπρὰ καὶ μικρὰ καὶ κυνίδια διαδακνόμενα καὶ 
παιδία φιλόνεικα, γελῶντα, εἶτα εὐθὺς κλαίοντα. 

͵ Ν \ QO \ Ν ’ \ 3 / 
πίστις δὲ καὶ αἰδὼς καὶ δίκη Kal ἀλήθεια 

“Πρὸς Ὄλυμπον ἀπὸ χθονὸς εὐρυοδείης." 
' Marcus quotes this line in a form that does not scan. 


cp. vu. 39 1£ the text is correct. 
2 reaevrala AD: redea P: τελευτᾷ Schenkl. 


1 Hom. Od. iv. 690. 
2 x, 36. There is no Pharisaism here, as some have sek wn- 
warrantably asserted, 9.6», St.Paul, 1 Cor. 1, 27 (Auth, Vers.). 


124 





BOOK V 


and brought the more excellent things intu mutual 
accord. 

31. How hast thou borne thyself heretofore 
towards Gods, parents, brothers, wife, children. 
teachers, tutors, triends, relations, household ὃ Canst 
thou say truly of them all to this dar, 


Doig to no man wrong, nor speaking aught thal is evil Ὁ} 


And call to mind all that thou hast passed through, 
all thou hast found strength to bear; that the story 
of thy life is now full-told and thy service is ending; 
and how many beautiful sights thou hast seen, how 
many pleasures and pains thoa hast disregarded, 
forgone what ambitions, and repaid with kindness 
how much unkindness.” 

32. Why do unskilled and ignorant souls confound ὃ 
him who has skill and has knowledge? What soul, 
then, has skill and knowledge* Even that which 
knoweth beginning and end, and the reason that 
informs all Substance, and governs the Whole from 
ordered cycle to cycle 4 through all eternity. 

33. But a little while and thou shalt be burnt 
ashes or a few dry bones, and possibly a name, 
possibly not a name even.’ And a name is but sound 
and a far off echo. And all that we prize so highly 
in our lives is empty and rotten and paltry, and we 
but as puppies snapping at each other, as quarrel- 
some children now laughing and anon in tears. But 
faith and modesty and justice and truth 


Up from the wide-wayed Earth have winged ther flight 
lo Olympus.” 
ἀν, 13; x. 7. 5 vill. 253 xii. 27. 
6 Hesiod, Op. 197. cp. Eur. ed. 439 and Lucian, Niyr. 16, 


who, speaking of Rome, says much the same of αἰδὼς and 
ἀρετὴ and δικαιοσύνη. See also Dio 71, 24, § 2. 


T25 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τό οὖν ἔτι τὸ ἐνταῦθῳ κατέχον; εἴγε τὰ μὲν 
2 \ 3 rey \ γ΄ δ a \ ὯΝ 
αἰσθητὰ εὐμετάβλητα καὶ οὐν ἱστῶτα' τὰ δὲ 
oN \ 
αἰσθητήρια ἀμυδρὰ καὶ εὐπαρατύπωτα" αὐτὸ δὲ 
τὸ ψυχάριον ἀναθυμίασις ἀφ᾽ αἵματος" τὸ δὲ 
\ 
εὐδοκ! ιμεῖν παρὰ τοιούτοις κενόν. τί οὖν; περι- 
μενεῖς Σ ἵλεως τὴν εἴτε σβέσιν εἴτε μετάστασιν. 
Ψ Ν 3 7 e Ν > , -f 9 mn , 3 
ἕως δὲ ἐκείνης ὁ καιρὸς ἐφίσταται, τί ἀρκεῖ; τί ὃ 
“ x \ \ / \ 2 a“ 2 “ 
ἄλλο ἢ θεοὺς μὲν σέβειν καὶ εὐφημεῖν, ἀνθρώπους 
o ΤᾺ 3 ? Fant 
δὲ εὖ ποιεῖν, καὶ "ἀνέχεσθαι" αὐτῶν καὶ “ἀπ- 
/ 
ἔχεσθαι" ὅσα δὲ ἐντὸς ὅρων τοῦ κρεᾳδίου καὶ 
τοῦ πνευματίου, ταῦτα μεμνῆσθαι μήτε σὰ ὄντα 
μήτε ἐπὶ σοί. 
“Ὁ on ‘ 
AO. Δύνασαι ἀεὶ εὐροεῖν, εἴγε καὶ εὐοδεῖν,: 
fan 
εἴγε καὶ ὁδῷ ὑπολαμβάνειν καὶ πράσσειν. δύο 

ῬᾺ Ν la) ἴω al \ ”~ ἌᾺ 
ταῦτα κοινὰ τῇ τε τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τῇ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 

\ \ a , Loa \ ΝΣ , 
KL παντὸς λογικοῦ ζώου ψυχῆ: τὸ μὴ ἐμποδίζ- 

¢ Ἵ 3 Ν ν 3 Ν᾿ la) f 
εσθαι ὑπ᾽ ἄλλου: καὶ τὸ ἐν τῇ δικαικῇ διαθέσει 
/ f \ / \ a \ 
καὶ πράξει ἔχειν τὸ ἀγαθόν, καὶ ἐνταῦθα τὴν 
ὄρεξιν ἀπολη)γειν. 
͵ Ἃ 2 4 7 ? \ γ᾿ > \ / 
λε. [ὦ μήτε κακία ἐστὶ τοῦτο ἐμὴ μήτε 
Ν 
ἐνέργεια κατὰ κακίαν ἐμὴν μήτε τὸ κοινὸν βλάπτ- 
ἠ ς \ 2 a f “ \ ¢ 
eTat, TL ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ διαφέρομαι; Tis δὲ βλάβη 
τοῦ κοινοῦ; 
“ 

AS My ὁλοσχερῶς τῇ φαντασίᾳ συναρπάξ. 
ἐδ αἱ: ἀχλὰ βοηθεῖν μὲν κατὰ δύναμιν καὶ Kar 
ἀξίαν: κἂν εἰς τὰ μέσα ἐλαττῶνται,) μὴ μέντοι 

, ΔΊ ΚΝ 7 Ν \ » 
βλάβην αὐτὸ φαντάζεσθαι, κακὸν γὰρ ἔθος. 
> ? e e 2 3 \ N ‘al n 
ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ὁ γέρων ἀπελθὼν Tov τοῦ θρεπτοῦ 

1 περιμένεις PA: περιμενεῖς Wilam. 


3 Lofft and Stich. for εὔδειν A, ὁδεύειν P. . 
' ἐλαττῶνται has no subject: ἐλαττοῖ τι Cor. 





Avi, 15. ep Tuetz. Chil. vir. 808 ; vin. 223. 


126 


BOOK V 





What then keeps thee here’—if mdeed sensible 
objects are ever changing and unstable, and our 
faculties are so feeble and so easily imsled ; and the 
poor soul itself is an exhalation from blood τ: and 
to be well-thought of im such a world mere vanity. 
What then remains? To wait with a good grace for 
the end, whether it be extinction or translation.- 
But till our time for that be come, what sufficeth ἢ 
What but to reverence the Gods and to praise them, 
to do good unto men and to bear nith them and 
jorbear, but, for all else that comes within the 
eampass of this poor flesh and breath, to remember 
that it is not thine nor under thy control ? 

34. Thou hast it in thy power that the current of 
ae life be ever fair, if also ‘tis thine to make fair 

way, if also in ordered way to think and act. The 
Soul of God and the souls of men and of every 
rational creature have these two characteristics in 
common: to suffer no let or hindrance from another, 
and to find their good in a condition and practice of 
justice, and to contine their propension to this. 

35. 1f this be no vice of mine nor the outcome of 
any vice of mine, and if the common interest does 
not suffer, why concern myself about 1t? And how 
can the common interest suffer ? 4 

36. Be not carried incontinently away by sense- 
age but rally to the fight as thou canst and 

sis due. If there be failure 5 in things indifferent, 
think not there is any great harm done; for that is 
an evil habit. But as ‘the greybeard (in the play) 


2 Marcus never seems to have made up his mind which it 
was tobe. Seeiv. 21; viii, 25; x1 3. 
ὁ These two constituted for Epictetus the whole ‘* Law 
and the Prophets”; see Aulus Gellius xvii. 19. 
Fe 29. νὰ, δὲ ὅν 36 
127 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ῥόμβον aT TEL μεμνημένος, ὅτι ῥόμβος, οὕτως οὖν 
καὶ ὧδε' Τέπείΐ τοι γίνῃ καλῶν. ἐπὶ τῶν ἐμβόλων, ἢ 
ἄνθρωπε, ἐπελάθου, τί ταῦτα ἣν; ‘ Nai: ἀλλὰ 
τούτοις περισπούδαστα." " διὰ τοῦτ᾽ οὖν καὶ σὺ 
μωρὸς γένῃ; 
᾿Εγενόμην ποτέ, ὁπουδήποτε καταλειφθείς, 
εὔμοιρος ἄνθρωπος' τὸ δὲ “εὔμοιρος, ἀγαθὴν 
μοῖραν σεαυτῷ ὠπονείμας" ἀγαθαὶ δὲ μοῖραι 
ἀγαθαὶ τροπαὶ ψυχῆς, ἀγαθαὶ ὁρμαί, ἀγαθαὶ 
πράξεις. 
1 ἀπεὶ τί γίνεται καλὸν Nyl.: ἐγκαλῶν Cor. ἔπειτα τί might 


be τοδί, 


128 


BOOk V 


tuking his leave reclaimed his toster-child’s top, not 
forgetting that if was buta top, so do thou here also.? 
Since indeed thou art found haranguing on the 
hustings, O Man, hast thou forgotten what this really 
means? dye, but people wall have it. Must thou too 
be a fool in consequence ἢ 

Time was that wheresoever forsaken? I was a 
man well-portioned; but that oan well-portioned 1s 
he that hath given himself a good portion : and good 
portions are good phases of the soul, good impulses, 
good actions. 


ΤῸ is not known what Maienus alludes tu. The tollowiuy 
words are unintelligible. 
* Ur overtaken (καταληφθεί5). 


129 


ΒΙΒΛΙΟΝ 


Ἢ τῶν ὅλων οὐσία εὐπειθὴς καὶ εὐτρεπής" 
τωι διοικῶν λόγος οὐδεμίαν ἐν ἑαυτῷ 
aw ἔχει τοῦ κακοποιεῖν: κακίαν γὰρ οὐκ ἔχει 
οὐδέ, τί κακῶς ποιεῖ οὐδὲ βλαπτεταί τι ὑπ᾽ 
ἐκείνου. πάντα δὲ κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνον γίνεται καὶ 
περαίνεται. 

fom Μὴ διαφέρου, πότερον ῥιγῶν ἢ θαλχπό- 
μενος τὸ πρέπον ποιεῖς, καὶ πότερον “νυστάξων 
ἢ ἱκανῶς ὕπνου ἔχων, καὶ πότερον κακῶς ἀκούων 
ἢ εὐφημούμενος, καὶ πότερον ἀποθνήσκων ἢ 
πράττων τι ἀλλοῖον. μία γὰρ τῶν βιωτικῶν 
πράξεων καὶ αὕτη ἐστί, καθ᾽ ἣν ἀποθνήσκομεν' 
ἀρκεῖ οὖν καὶ ἐπὶ ταύτης ‘TO παρὸν εὖ θέσθαι. 

γ΄. "Eo βλέπε' μηδενὸς πράγματος μήτε ἡ 
ἰδία ποιότης μήτε 4 ἀξία παρατρεχέτω σε. 

δ΄. Πάντα τὰ ὑποκείμενα τάχιστα μεταβαλεῖ, 
καὶ ἤτοι ἐκθυμιαθήσεται, εἴπερ ἥνωται ἡ οὐσία, 
ἢ σκεδασθήσεται. 

e. Ὃ διοικῶν λόγος οἷδε, πῶς διακείμενος, 
καὶ τί ποιεῖ καὶ ἐπὶ τίνος ὕλης. 


a 


ee 


" 


δ 


.- τ᾿ 


1 Not so all Stoics; cp. Sen. de Prov. 5: non potest artifex 
mutare materiem. 


oO 


2 yi, 22, 


130 


BOOK VI 


1. Tae Universal Substance is docile? and ductile; 
and the Reason that controls it has no motive in 
itself to do wrong. For it hath no wrongness and 
doeth no wrong, nor 15 anything harmed by it. But 
all things come into being and fulfil their purpose as 
it directs. 

2, Make no difference in doing thy duty ? whether 
thou art shivering or warm, drowsy ? or sleep-satisfied, 
defamed or extolled, dying or anything else. For the 
act of dying too is one of the acts of life.4 So 1t is 
enough in this also to get the mork in hand done well. 

3. Look within. Let not the special quality ® or 
worth of anything escape thee. 

4. All objective things will anon be changed and 
either etheiialized into the Universal Substance, if 
that indeed be one, or dispersed abroad.’ 

5. The controlling Reason knows its own bent and 
its work and the medium it works in. 


3 Galen (xiv. 3, Kuhn) says of Marcus that, owing tu the 
theriac which he prescribed him, συνέβαινεν αὐτῷ νυστάζει" 
καρωδῶς ἐν ταῖς ὁσημέραις πράξεσιν. ' 

4p. Sen. Hp. T7ad γι. . Onum ex vitae officies, mori. 

5 A saying of the ‘‘ Wise Men” See Suidas. cy. Lue. 
Necy. 21. It was a trait of Marcus, Dio 71. 26, § 4. 

ὃ = that which makes a thing what it 1s 

7 vin 9ὅ αὐ fin ; x». 7,§2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἐξομοιοῦσθαι. 

“ζ΄. ‘Eyl τέρπου καὶ προσαναπαύου, τῷ ἀπὸ 
πράξεως κοινωνικῆς μεταβαΐνει» ἐπὶ πρᾶξιν 
κοινωνικὴν σὺν μνήμῃ θεοῦ. 

ny. To ἡγεμονικόν ἐστι τὸ ἑαυτὸ ἐγεῖρον καὶ 
τρέπον καὶ ποιοῦν μὲν ἑαυτό, οἷον ἂν καὶ θέλῃ, 
ποιοῦν δὲ ἑαυτῷ φαίνεσθαι πᾶν τὸ συμβαῖνον, 
οἷον αὐτὸ θέλει. 

θ΄. Κατὰ Τὴν τῶν ὅλων φύσιν ἕκαστα περαΐν»- 
ETAL, οὐ γὰρ κατ᾽ ἄλλην γέ τίνα, φύσιν ἤτοι 
ἔξωθεν περιέχουσαν ἢ ἐμπεριεχομένην ἔνδον ἢ 

ἔξω ἀπηρτημένην. 

u. “Hrot κυκεὼν καὶ ἀντεμπλοκὴ καὶ σκεὸ- 
ἀσμός" ἢ ἕνωσις καὶ τάξις καὶ πρόνοια. εἰ μὲν 
οὖν τὰ πρότερα, τί καὶ ἐπιθυμῶ εἰκαΐῳ συγ- 
κρίματι καὶ φυρμῷ τοιούτῳ ἐνδιατρίβειν; τί δέ 
μοι καὶ μέλει ἄλλου τινὸς ἢ τοῦ ὅπως ποτὲ ὰ aia 
γίνεσθαι " ; τί δὲ καὶ ταράσσομαι; ἥξει γὰρ ἐπ᾽ 
ἐμὲ ὁ σκεδασμός, ὅ τι ἂν ποιῶ. εἰ δὲ θάτερά 
ἐστι, σέβω καὶ εὐσταθῶὼ καὶ θαρρῶὼ τῷ 
διοικοῦντι. 

ια΄. “Ὅταν ἀναγκασθῇς ὑπὸ τῶν TEPLETTNK- 
ότων οἱονεὶ διαταραχθῆναι, ταχέως ἐπάνιθι εἰς 
ἑαυτὸν καὶ μὴ ὑπὲρ τὰ ἀναγκαῖα ἐξίστασο τοῦ 
ῥυθμοῦ' ἔσῃ γὰρ ἐγκρατέστερος τῆς ἁρμονίας 
τῷ συνεχῶς εἰς αὐτὴν ἐπανέρχεσθαι. 

β΄. BW μητρυιάν τε ἅμα εἶχες καὶ μητέρα, 


7) ἐ f a) ¥ 7 \ ¢ \ 
so. AploTo, τρόπος τοῦ ἀμύνεσθαι Τὸ μὴ 





το». Hpiet. Prag. 130. So Diogenes, being asked ‘‘ How 
shall 1 avenge myself of mine enemy? 2 said, “Ὅν behaving 
like a gentleman,” Plut. de Leg. Poet. 5. 


132 


BOOK V1 


6. The best way of avenging thyself is not to do 
likewise.! 

7. Dehght in this one thing and take thy rest 
therem—trom social act to g0 on to social act, keeping 
all thy thoughts on God. 

ὃ, The ruling Reason it is that cai arouse and 
deflect itself, make itself whatever it will? and 
mvest everything that befalls with such a semblance 
as it wills. 

9. In accordance with the Nature of the Universe 
is accomplished each several thmg. For surcly this 
eannot be in accordance with any other nature, that 
either envelops it from without. or 1s enveloped by 
ib within, or exists in external detachment cut- 
side it. 

10. Hither a medley and a tangled web? and a 
dispersion abroad, or a unity and a plan and a 
Providence. If the former, why should I even wish to 
abide in such a random welter and chaos?’ Why care 
fur anything else than to turn again to the dust at 
last.t Why be disquieted? For, do what I will, the 
dispersion must overtake me. But if the latter, J 
bow in reverence, my feet are on the rock, and I 
put my trust in the Power that rules 

11. When forced, as it seems, by thine enviromnent 
to be utterly disquieted, return with all speed into 
thy self, staying in discord no longer than thou 
must. By constant recurrence to the harmony,° thou 
wilt gain more command over it. 

12. Hadst thou at once a stepmother snd a mother 


ὦν, 19 Pay 27) vile ot) 
' Hom. 7. vu. 99; c below, vi. 50 
> ep, Dio Chrys. vaxu 678 R. ἔξω τῆς ὁρμουίας τῆς Kare 
φύσιν. 


133 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἐκείνην τ᾽ ἂν ἐθεράπευες, καὶ ὅμως ἡ ἐπάνοδος 
σοι πρὸς τὴν μητέρα συνεχὴς ἐγίνετο. τοῦτό 
σοι νῦν ἐστιν ἡ αὐλὴ καὶ ἡ φιλοσοφία' ὧδε 

πολλάκις ἐπάνιθε καὶ προσαναπαύου ταύτῃ, δι 
ἣν καὶ τὰ ἐκεῖ σοι ἀνεκτὰ φαίνεται καὶ σὺ ἐν 
αὐτοῖς ἀνεκτός. 

γ΄. Οἷον δὴ τὸ φαντ τασίαν λαμβάνειν ἐπὶ 
τῶν ὄψων καὶ τῶν τοιούτων ἐδωδίμων, ὅτι νεκρὸς 
οὗτος ἰχθύος, οὗτος δὲ νεκρὸς ὄρνιθος ἢ χοίρου' 
καὶ πάλιν ὅτι ὁ Φάλερνος χυλώριόν ἐστι 
σταφυλίου, καὶ ἡ περιπόρφυρο: τριχία προ- 
βατίου αἱματίῳ κόγχης δεδευμένα' καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν 
κατὰ τὴν συνουσίαν ἐντερίου παράτριψις καὶ 
μετά τινος σπασμοῦ μυξαρίου ἔκκρισις" οἷαι δὴ 
αὗταί εἰσιν αἱ φαντασίαι καθικνούμεναι αὐτῶν 
τῶν πραγμάτων καὶ διεξιοῦσαι δι᾽ αὐτῶν, ὥστε 
ὁρᾶν, οἷά τινά ποτ᾽ ἐστίν' οὕτως δεῖ παρ᾽ ὅλον 
τὸν βίον ποιεῖν Kai, ὅπου λίαν ἀξιόπιστα τὰ 
πράγματα φαντάξεται, ἀπογυμνοῦν αὐτὰ καὶ 
τὴν εὐτέλειαν αὐτῶν καθορᾶν καὶ τὴν ἱστορίαν, 
ἐφ᾽ ἡ σεμνύνεται, περιαιρεῖν. δεινὸς γὰρ ὁ τῦφος 
παραλογιστὴς καὶ, ὅτε δοκεῖς μάλιστα περὶ τὰ 
σπουδαῖα καταγίνεσθαι, τότε μάλιστα κατα- 
γοητεύει. ὅρα γοῦν, ὁ Ἰζρώτης τί περὶ αὐτοῦ 
τοῦ Ἐενοκράτους λέγει. 

Oo. Τὰ πλεῖστα, ὧν ἡ πληθὺς θαυμάξει, εἰς 
γενικώτατα ἀνάγεται, τὰ ὑπὸ ἕξεως ἢ φύσεως 
συνεχόμενα, λίθους, ξύλα, συκᾶς, ἀμπέλους, 





1 Sen. Hp. 108. 

2 For hfe in kings’ courts see Lucian, Calumn. 10, and 
Icaro-Men. 16 3 ep. Lucian, Dem. 8.41. 

* ep. Tretz. Chu. vii. 801. He reacls νευρίου for ἐντερίου. 


134 


BOOK V1 


thou wouldst pay due service to the former, and yet 
thy constant recourse would be to thy mother. So 
hast thou now the court and philosophy for step- 
mother and mother. Cease not then to come to the 
latter and take thy rest in her,' whereby shall both 
thy court life seem more tolerable? to thee, and thou 
to thy court life. 

13. As in the case of meat and similar eatables 
the thought strikes us, this is the dead body of a fish, 
this of a tow or pig; aad again that this Falernian 1s 
merely the juice of a grape-cluster, and this purple- 
edged robe is nought but sheep’s wool® steeped 
in the blood of a shell-fish; or, of sexual inter- 
course, that it is merely internal attrition and the 
spasmodic excretion of mucus *—such, I say, as are 
these impressions that get to grips with the actual 
things and enter into the heart of them, so as to see 
them as they really are, thus should it be thy hfe 
through, and where things look to be above measure 
convincing, laying them quite bare, behold their 
paltriness and strip off their conventional prestige. 
For conceit is a past master in fallacies and, when 
thou flatterest thyself most that thou art engaged 
in worthy tasks, then art thou most of all deluded 
by it. At any rate, see what Crates has to say about 
none other than Xenocrates.° 

14. Objects admired by the common sort come 
chiefly under things of the most general kind, which 
are held together by physical coherence,® such as 
stones and wood, or by a natural unity, such as figs, 


5. It is not known what Marcus here refers to. 

ep. Sext. Emp adv Math. viii 2; 1x. 81, ra μὲν ὑπὸ ψιλῆς 
efews Oe τὰ δὲ ὑπὸ φύσεως, τὰ δὲ ὑπὸ ψυχῆ: καὶ ἕξεως μὲν 
ὡς λίθοι καὶ ξύλα, φύσεως δὲ καθάπερ τὰ φυτά, ψυχῆς δὲ τὰ ζῷα. 


135 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἐλαίας" τὰ δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν ὀλίγῳ μετριωτέρων | εἰς 
τὰ ὑπὸ ψυχῆς, οἷον ποίμνας, ἀγέλας" τὰ δὲ ὑπὸ 
τῶν ἔτι χαριεστέρων εἰς τὰ ὑπὸ λογικῆς ψυχῆς, 
οὐ μέντοι καθολικῆς, ἀλλὰ καθὸ τεχνικὴ ἢ 
ἄλλως πως ἐντρεχής, ἢ κατὰ ψιλὸν τὸ πλῆθος 
ἀνδραπόδων κεκτῆσθαι. ὁ δὲ ψυχὴν λογικὴν 
καθολικὴν καὶ πολιτικὴν τιμῶν οὐδὲν ἔτει τῶν 
ἄλλων ἐπιστρέφεται, πρὸ ἁπώντων δὲ τὴν ἑαυτοῦ 
ψυχὴν λογικῶς καὶ κοινωνικῶς ἔχουσαν καὶ 
κινουμένην διασώξει καὶ τῷ ὁμογενεῖ εἰς τοῦτο 
συνεργεῖ. 

ue. Τὰ μὲν σπεύδει γίνεσθαι, τὰ δὲ σπεύδει 
γεγονέναι, καὶ τοῦ γινομένου δὲ ἤδη τι ἀπέσβη: 
ῥύσεις καὶ ἀλλοιώσεις ἀνανεοῦσι τὸν κόσμον 
διηνεκῶς, ὥσπερ τὸν ἄπειρον αἰῶνα ἡ τοῦ χρόνου 
ἀδιάλειπτος φορὰ νέον ἀεὶ παρέχεται. ἐν δὴ 
τούτῳ τῷ ποταμῷ τί ἄν τις τούτων τῶν παρα- 
θεόντων ἐκτιμήσειεν, ἐφ᾽ οὗ στῆναι οὐκ ἔξεστιν; 
ὥσπερ εἴ τίς TL τῶν παραπετομένων στρουθαρίων 
φιλεῖν ἄρχοιτο' τὸ δ᾽ ἤδη ἐξ ὀφθαλμῶν ἀπελήλ- 
υθεν. τοιοῦτον δή τι καὶ αὐτὴ ἡ ξωὴ ἑκάστου, 
οἷον ἡ ἀφ᾽ αἵματος ἀναθυμίασις καὶ ἡ ἐκ τοῦ 
ἀέρος ἀνάπνευσις. ὁποῖον γάρ ἐστε τὸ ἅπαξ 
ἑλκύσαι τὸν ἀέρα καὶ ἀποδοῦναι, ὅπερ παρ- 
έκαστον ποιοῦμεν, τοιοῦτόν ἐστι καὶ τὸ τὴν πᾶσαν 
ἀναπνευστικὴν δύναμιν, ἣν χθὲς καὶ πρώην ἀπο- 
τεχθεὶς ἐκτήσω, ἀποδοῦναι ἐκεῖ, ὅθεν τὸ πρῶτον 
ἔσπασας. 


1 «θαυμαζόμενα:- Mor. 


BOOK VI 


vines, olives; and those which are adnured by 
persons of a somewhat higher capacity may be 
classed as things which are held together by a 
conscious life, Sich as flocks and herds ; and those 
which are admired by persons still more refined, as 
things held together by a rational soul; I do not 
mean rational as part of the Universal Reason, but in 
the sense of master of an art or expert in some other 
way, or merely in so far as to own a host of slaves. 
But he that prizes a soul which is rational, universal, 
and civic, no longer turns after anythmg else, but 
rather than everything besides keeps his own soul. 
in itselt and in its netivi ty, rational and social, and 
to this end works conjointly with all that is akin to 
him. 

15. Some things are hastening to be, others to be 
no more, while of those that haste into being some 
part is already extinct Fluxes and changes per- 
petually renew the world, just as the unbroken 
march of time makes ever new the infinity of ages. 
In this river of change,' which of the things which 
swirl past him, whereon no firm foothold is “possible, 
should a man prize so highiy? As well fall in love 
with a sparrow? that flits pact and in ἃ moment is gone 
from our eyes. In fact a man’s life itself is but as an 

exhalation from bleod? and an inhalation from the 
air. For just as it is to draw in the air once into 
our lungs and give it back again, as we do every 
moment, so is it to give back “thither, whence thou 
didst draw τὲ first, thy faculty of breathing which 
thou didst receive at thy birth yesterday or the day 
before. 

ἐν, 43; vu 19 

2 p, the parable of the sparrow in Berle αὶ 15. Ae 22 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


- e Ν \ - 
iw’. Οὔτε τὸ διαπνεῖσθαι ὡς τὰ φυτὰ τίμιον, 
a No , \ \ f 
οὔτε TO ἀναπνεῖν WS TA βοσκήματα Kal τὰ θηρία, 
9 A \ , / \ 
οὔτε TO τυποῦσθαι κατὰ φαντασίαν, οὔτε τὸ 
a > © / “ἢ Ν f 
νευροσπαστεῖσθαι καθ᾽ ὁρμὴν, οὔτε TO συνωγελάζ- 
’ mn Ν e/ 
εσθαι, οὔτε τὸ τρέφεσθαι: τοῦτο yap ὅμοιον 
n \ ΄ ἴω ~ 
TO ἀποκρίνειν TA περιττώματα τῆς τροφῆς. 
Φ “ 3 “ 
Τί οὖν τίμιον; TO κροτεῖσθαι; οὐχί. οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ 
ἊΝ nw e \ \ “~ 
TO ὑπὸ γλωσσῶν κροτεῖσθαι' αἱ yap παρὰ τῶν 
ΤᾺ f ad ’ ἴω > 
πολλῶν εὐφημίαν κρότος γχωσσῶν. ἀφῆκας οὖν 
[4 , n 
καὶ τὸ δοξάριον: τί καταλείπεται τίμιον; δοκῶ 
/ \ “a 
μὲν TO κατὰ τὴν ἰδίαν κατασκευὴν κινεῖσθαι 
\ ov xp? A \ ζ 2 I »} 
καὶ ἴσχεσθαι, ep ὃ καὶ αἱ ἐπιμέλειαι ἄγουσι 
f \ f a nA 
καὶ αἱ τέχναι. TE yap τέχνη πᾶσα τοῦτο 
7 \ \ , 
στοχάξεται, ἵνα TO κατασκευασθὲν ἐπιτηδείως 
” \ Ν ” Ν ὰ 7 ef 
ἔχῃ πρὸς τὸ ἔργον πρὸς ὃ κατεσκεύασται 6 
\ 5 a \ 
τε φυτουργὸς ὁ ἐπιμελούμενος τῆς ἀμπέλου Kal 
e ¢ od \ 7 
ὁ πωλοδάμνης καὶ ὁ τοῦ κυνὸς ἐπιμελούμενος, 
ΦᾺ a e 7 e 
τοῦτο ζητεῖ. at δὲ παιδαγωγίαι, αἱ δὲ δι- 
8 , ,.κ ae | “ὃ ἢ ὃ > \ 
AGKAALAL ἐπὶ τὶ σπεύδουσιν. WOE οὖν TO 
τίμιον". 
Ν “ \ x Ων ” 3 \ “ LL 
Καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ay ev ἔχῃ, οὐδὲν τῶν ἄλλων 
n , 
περιποιήσεις σεαυτῷ. οὐ παύσῃ Kal ἄλλα 
\ “- Ps > 2 ΄ ” » 
πολλὰ τιμῶν; οὐτ οὖν ἐλεύθερος ἔσῃ οὔτε 
4 b \ a 
αὐτάρκης οὔτε ἀπαθής. ἀνώγκη yap φθονεῖν, 
nm € " \ 3 / 3 “ 
ζηλοτυπεῖν, ὑφορᾶσθαι τοὺς ἀφελέσθαι ἐκεῖνα 
, / a 
δυναμένους, ἐπιβουλεύειν τοῖς ἔχουσι τὸ τιμώ- 
Ν la) et , 
μενον ὑπὸ cov ὅλως πεφύρθαι ἀνάγκη τὸν 
, ᾿ n 7 ~ 
ἐκείνων τινὸς ἐνδεῆ" προσέτι δὲ πολλὰ καὶ τοῖς 
Yat P:7t AD: perhaps τουτί. 


138 


BOOK Vi 


16. Neither 1s 1b an inner respiratiou,! such as 
that of plants, that we should prize, nor the breath- 
ing which we have in common with cattle and wild 
animals, nor the impressions we receive through our 
senses, nor that we are pulled by our impulses like 
marionettes,? nor our gregarious instincts, nor our 
need of nutriment ; for that is on a par with the 
rejection of the waste products of our food. 

What then is to be prized? The clapping of 
hands? No. Then not the clapping of tungues 
either. For the acclamations of the multitude are 
but a clapping of tongues. So overbeard goes that 
poor thing Fame also. What is left to be prized? 
This methinks: to limit our action or inaction to the 
needs of our own constitution, an end that all oecup- 
ations and arts set before themselves. For the aim 
of every art is that the thing constituted should be 
adapted to the work for which it has been constituted. 
It is so with the vine-dresser who looks after the 
vines, the colt-trainer, and the keeper of the kennels. 
And this is the end which the care of children and 
the methods of teaching have in view. There then 
is the thing to be prized! 

This once fairly made thine own, thou wilt not 
seek to gain for thyself anv of the other things as 
well. Wilt thou not cease prizing many other things 
also? Then thou wilt neither be free nor sufficient 
unto thyself nor unmoved by passion. For thou must 
needs be full of envy and jealousy, be suspicious of 
those that can rob thee of such things, and scheme 
against those who possess what thou pnizest. In fine, 
a man who needs any of those things cannot but 
be in complete turmoil, and in many cases find 


hun ] 211. Bete 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


θεοῖς μέμφεσθαι" ἡ δὲ τῆς ἰδίας διανοίας αἰδὼς 
καὶ τιμὴ σεαυτῷ τε ἀρεστόν σε ποιήσει καὶ τοῖς 
ἀνθρώποις εὐάρμοστον καὶ τοῖς θεοῖς σύμφωνον, 
τουτέστιν ἐπαινοῦντα, ὅσα ἐκεῖνοι διανέμουσι καὶ 
διωτετάχασιν. 

/ u 

ἐξ: Ave, κάτω, κύκλῳ φοραὶ τῶν ,στοιχείων. 
ἡ δὲ τῆς ἀρετῆς κίνησις ἐν οὐδεμιᾷ τούτων, ἀλλὰ 
θειότερόν τι καὶ ὁδῷ δυσεπινοήτῳ προιοῦσα 
εὐοδεῖ. 

f er 5) ὰ a“ ‘ \ > 4 “ 

Μη. Οἱὸν ἐστιν, ὃ ποιοῦσι. τοὺς μὲν ἐπὶ τοῦ 
αὐτοῦ χρόνου καὶ μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῶν ζῶντας ἀνθρώπους 
εὐφημεῖν οὐ θέλουσιν' αὐτοὶ δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν μετα- 
γενεστέρων εὐφημηθῆναι, οὺς οὔτε εἶδόν ποτε 
οὔτε ὄψονται, περὶ πολλοῦ ποιοῦνται. τοῦτο 
δὲ ἐγγύς ἐστι τῷ λυπηθῆναι ἄν, ὅτι οὐχὶ καὶ 
of προγενέστεροι περὶ σοῦ λόγους εὐφήμους 
ἐποιοῦντο. 

f Al f Vv 3 “Ὁ \ ὃ / 

ιθ΄. Nin, εἰ τὸ αὐτῷ σοὶ δυσκαταπόνητον, 

a > ? +a 7 ζ ? ’ ’ v 
τοῦτο ἀνθρώπῳ ἀδύνατον ὑπολαμβάνειν: ἀλλ᾿ εἰ 
te ἀνθρώπῳ δυνατὸν καὶ οἰκεῖον, τοῦτο Kal 

aA \ / 
σεαυτῷ ἐφικτὸν νόμιζε. 

, ‘ 21 Ἂ / \ ov / / 
κ΄. Ἔν τοῖς γυμνασίοις καὶ ὄνυξι κατέδρυψέ 
τὶς καὶ τῇ κεφαλῇ ἐρραγεὶς πληγὴν ἐποίησεν" 

/ 

ἀλλ᾽ οὔτε ἐπισημαινόμεθα οὔτε προσκόπτομεν 
οὔτε ὑφορώμεθα ὕστερον ὡς ἐπίβουλον: καίτοι 
φυλαττόμεθα, οὐ μέντοι ὡς ἐχθρὸν οὐδὲ μεθ᾽ 
ὑποψίας, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκκλίσεως εὐμενοῦς. τοιοῦτόν Tt 
γενέσθω καὶ ἐν τοῖς λοιποῖς μέρεσι τοῦ βίου: 
πολλὰ παρενθυμώμεθα, τῶν οἷον προσγυμναζο- 
μένων. ἔξεστι γώρ, ὡς ἔφην, ἐκκλίνειν, καὶ 
μηδὲν ὑποπτεύειν μηδὲ ἀπέχθεσθαι. 

Ka. Ei τίς με ἐλέγξαι καὶ παραστῆσαί μοι, 


T40 


BOOK VI 


ἔκ} δ even with the Gods.! But by reverencing and 
prizing thine own iuind, thou shalt make thyselt 
pleasing in thine own ΕΠ in accord with mankind, 
and in harmony with the Gods, that 1, grateful 
to them for all that they dispense and have 
ordained. 

Up, down,” round-wise sweep the elements 
along. But the motion of virtue is in none of these 
ways. [tis something more divine, and going forward 
on a mysterious path £ fares well upon its way. 

18. What a way to act! Men are chary of com- 
mending their contemporaries and associates, while 
they themselves set great store by the commendation 
of posterity, whom they have never seen or shall see. 
But this is next door to tahing it amiss that thy 
predecessors also did not commend thee. 

19, Because thou findesta thing difficult for thyself 
to accomplish do not conceive it to be impracticable 
for others; but whatever is possible for a man andin 
keeping with his nature consider also attainable by 
thyselt. 

20. Suppose that a competitor im the ring has 
gashed us with his nails and buited us violently with 
his head, we do not protest or take it amiss or 
suspect our opponent in future of foul play. Still 
we do keep an eye on hun, not indeed as an enemy, 
or from suspicion of him, but with good-humoured 
avoidance. Act much in the same way in all the 
other parts of life. Let us make many allowances 
for our fellow-athletes as it were. Avoidance is 
always possible, as I have said, without suspicion 
or hatred. 

21. If any one can prove and bring home to me 


ivi. 41. “vi 17; iv. 463 ix. 28. 2 χὰ δ. 
141 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ὅτε οὐκ ὀρθῶς ὑπολαμβάνω ἣ πράσσω, δύναται, 
χαίρων μεταθήσομαι" ξητῶ γὰρ τὴν ἀλήθειαν, 
ὑφ᾽ ἧς οὐδεὶς TQTOTE ἐβλάβη. βλάπτεται δὲ ὦ 
ἐπιμένων ἐπὶ τῆς ἑαυτοῦ ἀπάτης καὶ ἀγνοίας. 

κβ΄. "Eye τὸ ἐμαυτοῦ καθῆκον ποιῶ' Ta ἄλλα 
με οὐ περισπᾷ" ἤτοι γὰρ ἄψυχα ἢ ἄλογα, ἢ 
TET AAVH Leva καὶ τὴν ὁδὸν ἀγνοοῦντα. 

Key Tots μὲν ἀλόγοις ζῴοις καὶ καθόλου 
πράγμασι καὶ ὑποκειμένοις, ὡς λόγον ἔχων λόγον 
μὴ ἔχουσι, χρῶ μεγαλοφρόνως καὶ ἐλευθέρως" 
τοῖς δὲ ἀνθρώποις, ὡς λόγον ἔχουσι, χρῶ 
κοινωνικῶς. ἐφ᾽ ἅπασι δὲ θεοὺς ἐπικαλοῦ" καὶ 
μὴ διαφέρου πρὸς τὸ πόσῳ χρόνῳ ταῦτα πράξεις" 
ἀρκοῦσι γὰρ καὶ τρεῖς ὧραι τοιαῦται. 

κδ΄. ᾿Αλέξανδρος ὁ Μακεδὼν καὶ ὁ ὀρεωκόμος 
αὐτοῦ ἀποθανόντες εἰς ταὐτὸ κατέστησαν" ἤτοι 
γὰρ «ἀν»ελήφθησαν εἰς τοὺς αὐτοὺς τοῦ κόσμου 
σπερματικοὺς λόγους ἢ διεσκεδάσθησαν ὁμοίως 
εἰς τὰς ἀτόμους. 

κε. ᾿Ενθυμήθητι, πόσα ᾿κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν 
ἀκαριαῖον χρόνον ἐν ἑκάστῳ ἡμῶν ἅμα γίνεται 
σωματικὰ ὁμοῦ καὶ ψυχικά: καὶ οὕτως οὐ θαυμά- 
σεις, εἰ πολὺ πλείω, μᾶλλον δὲ πάντα τὰ 
γινόμενα | ἐν τῷ ἑνί τε καὶ σύμπαντι, ὃ δὴ κόσμον 
ὀνομάζομεν, ἅμα ἐνυφίσταται. 

κε΄. ᾿Βάν τίς σοι προβάλῃ, “ πῶς γράφεται τὸ 
᾿Αντωνίνου ὁ ὄνομα," μήτι κατεντεινόμενος προοίσῃ 
ἕκαστον τῶν στοιχείων; τί οὖν, ἐὰν ὀργίξωνται, 


1 γινόμενα -« καὶ γεννητὰ: Schenkl, 





liv. 19; vi. 80, § 2; viii 10. 2 iv. 46. 
® Usually singular in the Greek. Seeiv 14. 21; ix. 1, 


T42 


BOOK VI 


that a conception or act of mine is wrong, I will 
amend! it, aud be thanklul. For I seek the truth, 
whereby no one was ever harmed. But he is 
harmed who persists in his own self-deception and 
ignorance, 

22. Ido my own duty; other things do not distract 
me. For thev are either inanimate or irrational, 
or such as have gone astray and know not the road.* 

23. Conduct thyself with magnanimity and freedom 
towards irrational creatures and, generally, towards 
ee. and objective things. for thou hast 

sason and they have none. But men have reason, 
Te trent thean as fellow creatures. And in all 
cases call upon the Gods, and do not concern thyself 
with the question, How lung shall I'doths? Three 
hours are enough so spent. 

24. Death reduced to the same condition Alexander 
the Macedonian and his muleteer, for either they 
were taken back into the saine Seminal Reason ὃ 
of the Universe or scattered alike mto the 
atoms * 

25. Bear in mind how many things happen to each 
one of us with respect to our bodies as well as our 
souls in the same momentary space of time, so wilt 
thou cease to wonder that many more things—not 
to say all the things that come into existence in that 
One and Whole which in fact we call the Universe— 
subsist in it at one time, 

26. If one enquire of thee, How ts the name 
Antoninus wiilten? wilt thou with vehemence 
enunciate each constituent letter? What then? 
If thy listeners lose their temper, wilt thou lose 


4 Marcus puts the two alternatives (Stoic and Epicurean), 
though he does not himself adnut the pecond. 


143 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


" 3 / / τ 
μήτι ἀντοργιῇ; οὐκ ἐξωριθμήσῃ πρῴως προϊὼν 
ἕκαστον τῶν γραμμάτων; οὕτως οὖν καὶ ἐνθάδε 
μέμνησο, ὅτι πᾶν καθῆκον ἐξ ἀριθμῶν τινῶν 
συμπληροῦται. τούτους δεῖ τηροῦντα καὶ μὴ 

“ / 
θορυβούμενον μηδὲ τοῖς δυσχεραίνουσιν ἀντι- 
ἮῃἮ ς ω , 
δυσχεραίνοντα περαίνειν ὁδῷ τὸ προκείμενον. 

ἴω Ν / la) 
Ko. [Πῶς ὠμόν ἐστι, μὴ ἐπιτρέπειν τοῖς 
ΤᾺ , a fal 
ἀνθρώποις ὁρμᾶν ἐπὶ τὰ φαινόμενα αὐτοῖς οἰκεῖα 
/ / \ 
καὶ συμφέροντα: καίτοι τρόπον τινὰ οὐ συγ- 
a fo) “~ A 3 ἴω, 
χωρεῖς αὐτοῖς τοῦτο ποιεῖν, ὅταν ὠγανακτῆς, 
¢ / \ ΄ 
ὅτε ἁμαρτάνουσι. φέρονται γὰρ πάντως ὡς 
4 κι al 3 
ἐπὶ οἰκεῖα καὶ συμφέροντα αὐτοῖς. “AXA οὐκ 
la) / 
ἔχει οὕτως." οὐκοῦν δίδασκε καὶ δείκννε μὴ 
ἀγανακτῶν. 
/ Od b f > θ ἴω 3 
KN). ἄνατος ἀνάπαυλα αἰσθητικῆς avti- 
,ὕ ¢ A , 
TUTLAS καὶ ὁρμητικῆς νευροσπαστίας καὶ δια- 
νοητικῆς διεξόδον καὶ τῆς πρὸς τὴν σάρκα 
/ 
λειτουργίας. 
θ' Αἱ i 3 3 Ὄ Bi \ al f 
κθ΄. Αἰσχρὸν ἐστιν, ἐν ᾧ βίῳ τὸ σῶμά σοι 
3 Lal > lal 
μὴ ἀπαυδᾷ, ἐν τούτῳ THY ψυχὴν προαπαυδᾶν. 
/ + \ “ 
λ΄. “Opa, μὴ “ἀποκαισαρωθῇς, μὴ βαφῆς" 
/ / ω 
γίνεται γάρ. τήρησον οὖν σεαυτὸν ἁπλοῦν, 
7 »" 
ἀγαθόν, ἀκέραιον, σεμνόν, ἄκομψον, τοῦ δικαίου 
΄ a κι / 
φίλον, θεοσεβῆ, εὐμενῆ, φιλόστοργον, ἐρρωμένον 
\ \ / a 
πρὸς τὰ πρέποντα ἔργα. ἀγώνισαι, ἵνα τοιοῦτος 
/ et θέ fal / 
συμμείνῃς, οἱὸν ce ἠθέλησε ποιῆσαι φιλοσοφία. 
INA / n 3 ΄, \ ς , 
αἰδοῦ θεούς, σῶξε ἀνθρώπους. βραχὺς ὁ Bios 
1 iti, 1. 2 -y, 28, 
ὁ vill. 86 So Marcus himself in a letter to Fronto (ad Cues. 


144 


BOOK VI 


thine? Wouldst thou not go on gently to enumerate 
each letter’ So recollect that in hfe too every 
duty is the sum of separate items! Of these thou 
must take heed, and carry through methodically 
what is set before thee, in no wise troubled or shewing 
counter-irritation against those who are irritated with 
thee. 

27. How intolerant it is not to permit men to 
cherish an impulse towards what is in the eyes 
congenial and advantageous! Yet in a sense thou 
withholdest from them the right to do this, when 
thou resentest their wrong-doing For they are 
undoubtedly drawn to what they deem congenial 
and advantageous. Bui they are mistaken. Well, 
then, teach and enlighten them without any resent- 
ment.? 

28. Death is a release from the impressions ot 
sense, and from impulses that make us their puppets, 
from the vagaries of the mind, and the hard service 
of the flesh. 

29. It is a disgrace for the soul to be the first to 
succumb in that life in which the body does not 
succumb ὃ 

30. See thou be not Cuesurifred, nor take that 
dye,* for there is the possibility. So keep thyself a 
simple and good man, uncorrupt, dignified, plain, a 
friend of justice, god-fearing, gracious, affectionate, 
manful in doing thy duty. Strive to be always such 
as Philosophy minded to make thee. Revere the 
Gods, save mankind. Lifeis short This only isthe 


iv 8): Turpe fuerit Ciutius wiam corporis quam anime 
studium ad recinerandam sanitatem posse durare. 

4 There was also a ‘‘philosophic dye”: see Lucian, Aus 
Aceus ἃ, 


145 
L 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


εἷς καρπὸς τῆς ἐπιγείου ζωῆς, διάθεσις ὁσία καὶ 
πράξεις κοινωνικαΐί. 

Πάντα ὡς ᾿Αντωνίνου μαθητής: τὸ ὑπὲρ τῶν 
κατὰ λόγον πρασσομένων εὔτονον ἐκείνου, καὶ 
τὸ ὁμαλὲς πανταχοῦ, καὶ τὸ ὅσιον, καὶ τὸ 
εὔδιον. τοῦ προσώπου, καὶ τὸ μειλίχιον, καὶ τὸ 
ἀκενόδοξον, καὶ τὸ περὶ τὴν κατάληψιν τῶν 
πραγμάτων φιλότιμον: καὶ ὡς ἐκεῖνος οὐκ ἄν τι 
ὅλως παρῆκε, μὴ πρότερον ev μάλα κατιδὼν καὶ 
σαφῶς νοήσας" καὶ ὡς ἔφερεν ἐκεῖνος τοὺς ἀδίκως 
αὐτὸν μεμφομένους μὴ ἀντιμεμφόμενος" καὶ ὡς 
ἐπ᾽ οὐδὲν ἔσπευδεν: καὶ ὡς διαβολὰς οὐκ ἐδέχετο: 
καὶ ὡς ἀκριβὴς ἣν ἐξεταστὴς ἠθῶν καὶ πράξεων' 
καὶ οὐκ ὀνειδιστῆς, οὐ ψοφοδεῆς, οὐχ ὑπόπτης, 
οὐ σοφιστής" καὶ ὡς ὀλίγοις ἀρκούμενος, οἷον 
οἰκήσει, στρωμνῇ, ἐσθῆτι, τροφῇ, ὑπηρεσίᾳ' 
καὶ ὡς φιλόπονος καὶ μακρόθυμος: καὶ οἷος 
μένειν ἐν τῷ «αὐτῷ! μέχρι ἑσπέρας διὰ 
τὴν λιτὴν δίαιταν μηδὲ τοῦ ἀποκρίνειν τὰ περιττ- 
ὦματα Tapa τὴν συνήθη ὥραν χρήξων' καὶ τὸ 
βέβαιον καὶ ὅμοιον ἐν ταῖς φιλίαις αὐτοῦ" καὶ 
τὸ ἀνέχεσθαι -τῶν;» ἀντιβαινόντων παρρησιαστ- 
iK@S ταῖς γνώμαις αὐτοῦ, καὶ χαίρειν, εἴ τις 
δεικνύοι κρεῖττον' καὶ ὡς θεοσεβὴς χωρὶς δεισι- 
δαιμονίας" ἵν᾽ οὕτως εὐσυνειδήτῳ σοι ἐπιστῇ ἡ 
τελευταία ὥρα, ὡς ἐκείνῳ. 

λα΄. ᾿Δνάνηφε καὶ ἀνακαλοῦ σεαυτόν, καὶ 
ἐξυπνισθεὶς πάλιν καὶ ἐννοήσας, ὅτι ὄνειροί σοι 
1 εὔδιον Xyl.: εὐόδιον ῬΑ. 2 μὲν ἐν τῷ PA: as in text Cas. 
146 


BOOK VI 


harvest of emthly existence, a righteous disposition 
and social acts. 

Do all things as a disciple of Antoninus? 
Think of his constancy in every act rationally 
undertaken, his invariable equability, his piety, his 
serenity of countenance, his sweetness of disposi- 
tion, his contempt for the bubble of fame, and his 
zeal for getting a true grip of affairs. How he 
would never on any account dismiss a thing until 
he had first thoroughly scrutmized and clearly con- 
ceived it; how he put up with those who found fault 
with him anfairly, finding no fault with them in 
return; how he was never in a hurry; how he gave 
no ear to slander,? and with what nicety he tested 
dispositions and acts; was no imputer of biame, and 
nu craven, not a suspicious man, nor a sophist; 
what little sufficed him whether for lodging or bed, 
dress, food or attendance ; how fond he was of work, 
and how long-suifering; how he would remain the 
whole day at the same oceupation,® owing to his 
spare diet? not even requiring to relieve nature 
except at the customary time ; and how loyal he was 
to his friends and always the same ; and his forbear- 
anee towards those who openly opposed his views, 
and his pleasure when anyone pointed out something 
better®; and how god-fearing he was and yet not 
given to superstition. Take heed to all this, that 
thy last hour come upon thee as much at peace with 
thy conscience as he was. 

31. Be sober once more and call back thy senses, 
and being roused again from sleep and, realizing that 
they were but dreams that beset thee, now awake 


1 ep. 1. 16 throughout. 2 leo 
2 Or, in the same place. toy... 3. 2 Vi OS VLG; 
1.17 
: 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἡνώχλουν, πάλιν ἐγρηγορὼς 5'λέπε ταῦτα, ὡς 
ἐκεῖνα ἔβλεπες. 

rf. Ἔκ σωματίου εἰμὶ καὶ ψυχῆς. τῷ μὲν 
οὖν σωματίῳ πάντα ἀδιάφορα: οὐδὲ γὰρ δύναται 
διαφέρεσθαι. Τῇ δὲ διανοίᾳ ἀδιάφορα, ὅσω «μὴ 
ἐστιν αὐτῆς ἐνεργήματα" ὅσα δέ “γε αὐτῆς ἔστιν 
ἐνεργήμωτα, ταῦτα πάντα ἐπ᾽ αὐτῇ ἐστιν. καὶ 
τούτων μέντοι “περὶ μόνον τὸ παρὸν πρωγματ- 
eveT au’ τὰ γὰρ μέλλοντα καὶ παρῳχηκότα 
ἐνεργήματα αὐτῆς καὶ αὐτὰ ἤδη ἀδιάφορα. 

ry’. Οὐκ ἔστιν ὸ πόνος τῇ χειρὶ οὐδὲ τῷ 
ποδὶ παρὰ φύσιν, “μέχρις ἂν ποιῇ ὁ ποῦς τὰ τοῦ 
ποδὸς καὶ ἡ χεὶρ τὰ τῆς χειρός. οὕτως οὖν οὐδὲ 
ἀνθρώπῳ, ὡς ἀνθρώπῳ, παρὰ φύσιν ἐστὶν ὁ 
πόνος, μέχρις ἂν ποιῇ τὰ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου. εἰ δὲ 
παρὰ φύσιν αὐτῷ οὐκ ἔστιν, οὐδὲ κακόν ἐστιν 
αὐτῷ. 

nO. ὩἩλίκας ἡδονὰς ἤσθησαν λῃσταί, κίναιδοι, 
πατραλοῖαι, τύραννοι. 

re. Οὐχ ὁρᾷς, πῶς οἱ βάναυσοι τεχνῖται 
ἁρμόζονται μὲν μέχρι τινὸς πρὸς τοὺς ἰδιώτας, 
οὐδὲν ἧσσον μέντοι ἀντέχονται τοῦ λόγου τῆς 
τέχνης, καὶ τούτου a ἀποστῆναι, οὐχ ὑπομένουσιν; 
οὐ δεινόν, εἰ ὃ ἀρχιτέκτων καὶ ὁ ἰατρὸς μᾶλλον 
αἰδέσονται τὸν τῆς ἰδίας τέχνης λόγον ἢ ὁ 
ἄνθρωπος τὸν ἑαυτοῦ, ὃς αὐτῷ κοινός ἐστι πρὸς 
τοὺς θεούς: 

λς΄. “H ᾿Ασία, ἡ Ἐὐρώπη γωνίαι τοῦ κόσμου" 
πᾶν πέλαγος σταγὼν τοῦ κόσμου" "AGas βωλά- 
ριον τοῦ κόσμου" πᾶν τὸ ἐνεστὼς τοῦ χρόνου 
στιγμὴ τοῦ αἰῶνος. πάντα μικρά, εὔτρεπτα, 
ἐναφανιζόμενα. 


τ4ὃ 


BOOK V1 


again, luok at these realities as thou didst at those 
thy dreams. 

32. I consist of body and soul.! To the body indeed 
all things are indifferent, for τῷ cannot concern itself 
with them. But to the mind? only those things are 
indifferent which are not its own activities; and all 
those things that are its own activities are in ils 
own power. Howbeit, of these it is only concerned 
with the present ; for as tu its activities in the past 
and the future, these two rank at once among things 
ee 

. For hand or foot to feel pain is no violation of 
snare. so long as the foot does its ewn appointed 
work, and the hand its own. Similarly pain for a 
man, as man,1s no unnatural thing so long as he does 
a man’s appointed work. But, if not unnatural, then 
is it not an evil either. 

34. The pleasures of the brigand, the pathic, 
the parricide, the tyrant®—just think what they 
are ! 

35. Dost thou not see how the mechanic craftsman, 
though to some extent willing to humour the non- 
expert, yet holds fast none the less to the principles 
of his handicraft, and cannot endure to depart from 
them. Is it not strange that the architect and the 
physician should hold the rationale of their respective 
arts in higher reverence than a man his own reason, 
which he has in common with the Gods? 

36. Asia, Europe, corners of the Universe: the 
whole Ocean a drop in the Universe: Athos but a 
little clod therem: all the present a point in 
Eternity :—everything on a tiny scale, so easily 
changed, so a vanished. 


ἣν, 183, 2 Here διάνοια = ψυχή. 


149 


2 





MARCUS AURELIUS 


Πάντα ἐκεῖθεν ἐ ἔρχεται, ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου τοῦ κοινοῦ 
ἡγεμονικοῦ ὁρμήσαντα ἢ κατ᾽ ἐπακολούθησιν. 
καὶ τὸ χάσμα οὗν τοῦ λέοντος καὶ τὸ δηλητήριον 
καὶ πᾶσα κακουργία, ὡς ἄκανθα, ὡς βόρβορος, 
ἐκείνων ἐπυγεννήματα τῶν σεμνῶν καὶ καλῶν. 
μὴ οὖν αὐτὰ ἀχλότρια τούτου, οὗ σέβεις, 
φαντάξου' ἀλλὰ Τὴν Τ πάντων πηγὴν ἐπιλογίζου. 

Me... Ὁ τὰ νῦν ἰδὼν πάντα ἑώρακεν, ὅσα TE 
ἐξ ἀιδίου ἐγένετο καὶ ὅσα εἰς TO ἄπειρον ἔσται" 
πάντα γὰρ ὁμογενῆ καὶ ὁμοειδῆ. 

ry’. Πολλάκις ἐνθυμοῦ τὴν ἐπισύνδεσιν πάν- 
Tov τῶν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ καὶ σχέσιν πρὸς ἄλληλα. 
τρόπον γάρ τινα πάντα ἀλλήλοις ἐπιπτέπελεκται, 
καὶ πάντα κατὰ τοῦτο φίλα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν" καὶ 
γὰρ ἄλλῳ ἄλλο! ἑξῆς ἐστε ταῦτα " διὰ τὴν 
τονικὴν κίνησιν ὃ καὶ σύμπνοιαν καὶ τὴν ἕνωσιν 
τῆς οὐσίας. 

λθ΄. Οἷς συγκεκλήρωσαι πράγμασι, τούτοις 
συνάρμοζε σεαυτόν' καὶ οἷς συνείληχας ἀνθρώπ- 
ols, τούτους φίλει, ἀλλ᾽ ἀληθινῶς. 

Ἢ Ὄργανον, ἐργαλεῖον, σκεῦος πᾶν εὖ, πρὸς 
ὃ κατεσκεύασται, ποιεῖ, εὖ ἔχει: καίτοι ἐκεῖ ὁ 
κατασκευάσας ἐκποδών. ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν ὑπὸ φύσεως 
συνεχομένων ἔνδον ἐστὶ καὶ παραμένει ἡ κατα- 
σκευάσασα δύναμις: καθὸ καὶ μᾶλλον αἰδεῖσθαι 
αὐτὴν δεῖ καὶ νομίξειν, ἐὰν κατὰ τὸ βούλημα 
ἄλλῳ ἄλλο Cor.: ἄλλῳ P ἄλλο A. 

τοῦτο PA: ταῦτα Schenkl. 


τοπικὴν κόνησιν P by an obvious misprint as Xyl. trans- 
lates roustantem motum. 


wo ν: 


oe 


τὴ ον 8. 88: χη 26: mae oer 
3a, lt; iv. 823 vii. 1, 495 xi. 1; xik 9.. 





150 


BOOK VI 


All things come from that one source, from that 
ruling Reason of the Universe,! either under a primary 
impulse from it or by way of consequence. And 
therefore the gape of the lion’s jaws? and poison and 
all noxious things, such as thorns and mire, are but 
after-results of the grand and the beautiful. Look 
not then on these as alien to that which thou dost 
reverence, but turn thy thoughts to the one source of 
all things. 

37. He, who sees what now is, hath seen all that 
ever hath been from times everlasting, and that shall 
be to eternity ὁ; for all things are of one lineage and 
one likeness. 

38. Meditate often on the intimate union and 
mutual interdependence of all things inthe Universe. 
For in a manner all things are mutually intertwined, 
and thus all things have a liking for one ancther. 
For these things are consequent one on another by 
reason of their contracting and cxpanding ὁ motion, 
the sympathy ° that breathes through them, and the 
unity of all substance. 

39. Fit thyself to the environment that is thy 
portion,® and love the men among whom thy lot is 
thrown, but whole-heartedly.’ 

10. Every implement, tool, or vessel is well if it 
do the work for which it 1s made, and yet in their 
ease the maker is not at hand. But in the things 
which owe their organic unity to Nature, the Power 
that made is within them and abides there. Where- 
fore also must thou reverence it the more, and 


+ πονικὴν ; see Index III. 

» cp Diog. Laert. Zeno FU: τὴν τῶν οὐρανίων πρὸς τὸ ἐπίγεια 
cuunvolay Kal συντονιαν, | ep 

7 vi. 48; vill 22, cp. 1 St. Peter, 1 22, 


151 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


/ Ν 1 3) ‘\ 2 ὃ fu 9} 
ταύτης σαυτὸν' ἔχῃς καὶ ’ διεξώγῃς, ἔχειν σοι 
“ oi \ fal 
πάντα κατὰ νοῦν. ἔχει δὲ οὕτως καὶ τῷ παντὶ 
fal \ [φ 
κατὰ νοῦν τὰ ἑαυτοῦ. 
Σ ἊΝ / 
μα΄. Ὅ τε ἂν τῶν ἀπροαιρέτων ὑποστήσῃς 
la 3 x x , Σ 7) \ x f 
υτῷ ἀγαθὸν ἢ κακόν, ἀνάγκη κατὰ τὴν περί- 
σαυτῷ ἀγαθὸν ἢ κακόν, ἀνάγκη κατὰ τὴν περί. 
πτωσιν τοῦ τοιούτου κακοῦ ἢ τὴν ὠπότευξιν τοῦ 
A / , o 
τοιούτου ἀγαθοῦ, μέμψασθαί σε θεοῖς, καὶ 
mm \ / 5) + 
ἀνθρώπους δὲ μισῆσαι τοὺς αἰτίους ὄντας ἢ 
ral γ ΄, ΓΝ “a 
ὑποπτευομένους ἔσεσθαι τῆς ὠποτεύξεως ἢ τῆς 
, Ν LO ~ ὃ} Ν ὃ Ν \ 
περιπτώσεως" καὶ ἀδικοῦμεν δὴ TOAXA OLA τὴν 
\ fa) / 3\ \ 4 \ x7? eC oon 
πρὸς ταῦτα διαφοράν. ἐὰν δὲ μόνα τὰ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν 
\ / , , 
ἀγαθὰ καὶ κακὰ κρίνωμεν, οὐδεμία αἰτία κατα- 
a 7 b) \ 
λείπεται οὔτε θεῷ ἐγκαλέσαι οὔτε πρὸς ἄνθρωπον 
on / 
στῆναι στώσιν πολεμίου. 
t , 5 a > / a 
μβ΄. avtes evs ἕν ἀποτέλεσμα συνεργοῦμεν, 
οἱ μὲν εἰδότως καὶ παρακολουθητικῶς, οἱ δὲ 
e \ >) 
ἀνεπιστάτως" ὥσπερ καὶ “τοὺς καθεύδοντας," 
3 εἰς , ες 2 7) > ” 7 \ 
οἶμαι, ὁ Ἡράκλειτος “ ἐργώτας εἶναι" λέγει, καὶ 
\ na ω f 7 
συνεργοὺς τῶν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ γινομένων. ἄλλος 
3 “nn 7 ‘ 
δὲ κατ΄ ἄλλο συνεργεῖ: ἐκ περιουσίας δὲ καὶ 
td Ul ig / 
ὁ μεμφόμενος καὶ ὁ ἀντιβαίνειν πειρώμειος 
" , aA 
καὶ ἀναιρεῖν τὰ γινόμενα. καὶ γὰρ TOD τοιούτου 
5 ς , \ a 
ἔχρηζεν ὁ κόσμος. λοιπὸν οὖν σύνες, εἰς τίνας 
σεαυτὸν κατατάσσεις" ἐκεῖνος μὲν γὰρ πάντως 
ἴω 7 e 4 ξ ΝᾺ 
FOL καλῶς χρήσεται ὁ τὰ ὅλα διοικῶν, καὶ παρα- 
} / ’ ἴω val ‘ 
δέξεταί σε εἰς μέρος TL TOV συνεργῶν καὶ συν- 
Las \ \ \ a“ Φ 
εργητικῶν. ἀλλὰ σὺ μὴ τοιοῦτο μέρος γένῃ, οἷος 


1 αὐτὸν As οὔ P: σαυτὸν Cor,: αὐτὸς Schenk. 
ὁ ἔχῃς καὶ P: omit A. 


BOOK V1 


realize that if thou keep and conduct thyself ever 
according to its will, all is to thy mind. So also to 
its mind are the things of the Universe. 

41. If thou regardest anything not in thine own 
choice as good or evil for thyself, it 1s mevitable that, 
on the incidence of such an evil or the miscarriage 
of such a good, thou shouldst upbraid the Gods, 
aye, and hate men as the actual or supposed cause of 
the one or the other ; and in fact many are the wrong- 
douigs we commit bv setting a value on such things. 
But if we discriminate as good and evil ouly the 
thes m our power, there is no occasion left for 
accusing the Gods ® or iaking the stand of an enemy 
towards men. 

12, We are all feHow-workers towards the ful- 
filment of one object, some of us knowingly and 
jntelligently, others blindly: just as Heraclitus, I 
think, says that even when they sleep men «are 
workers aud fellow-agents in all that goes on in the 
world.? One is a co-agent in this, another in that, 
and in abundant measure also he that murmurs and 
seeks to hinder or disannul what cecurs. For the 
Universe had need of such men also. It remains 
then for thee to decide with whom thou ait ranging 
thyself. For He that controls the Universe will in 
anv case put thee to a good use and admit thee to a 
place among his fellow-workers and  cvadjutors. 
But see that thou fill no such place as the paltry 


νὰ, 16833 1x. Lad med. cy. pict. 1 27 αὶ 18 

* uc, treating as important things which are ἀδιάφορα, or 
of no consequence either way ‘vi. 10 § ὃ, 

{ep iv 46 But Plutarch in his treatise On Superstition 
cites a saying of Heraclitus to the etect that sleepers live 
ma world of their own, 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ὁ εὐτελὴς καὶ γελοῖος στίχος ἐν τῷ δράματι, 
οὗ Χρύσιππος μέμνηται. 

py Μήτι ὁ ἥλιος τὰ τοῦ ὑετοῦ ἀξιοῖ ποιεῖν; 
μή τι ὃ ᾿Ασκληπιὸς τὰ τῆς Καρποφόρου; τί δ 
τῶν ἄστρων ἕκαστον; οὐχὶ διάφορα μέν, συνεργὰ 
δὲ πρὸς τατον! 

pe. We μὲν οὖν ἐβουλεύσαντο περὶ ἐμοῦ καὶ 
τῶν ἐμοὶ συμβῆναι ὀφειλόντων οἱ θεοί, καλῶς 
ἐβουλεύσαντο" ἄβουλον γὰρ θεὸν οὐδὲ ἐ ἐπινοῆσαι 
ῥάδιον' κακοποιῆσαι δέ με διὰ τίνα αἰτίαν 
ἔμελλον ὁρμᾶν; τί γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἢ τῷ κοινῷ, οὗ 
μάλιστα προνοοῦνται, ἐκ τούτου περιεγένετο; 
εἰ δὲ μὴ ἐβουλεύσαντο, κατ᾽ ἰδίαν mepl ἐμοῦ, 
περί γε τῶν κοινῶν πάντως ἐβουλεύσαντο, οἷς 
κατ᾿ ἐπακολούθησιν καὶ ταῦτα συμβαίνοντα 
ἀσπάζεσθαι καὶ στέργειν ὀφείλω. εἰ δ᾽ ἄρα περὶ 
μηδενὸς βουλεύονται (πιστεύειν μὲν οὐχ ὅσιον), 
ἢ μηδὲ θύωμεν μηδὲ εὐχώμεθα μηδὲ ὀμνύωμεν 
μηδὲ τὰ ἄλλα πράσσωμεν, ἅπερ ἕκαστα ὡς πρὸς 
παρόντας καὶ συμβιοῦντας τοὺς θεοὺς πράσσ- 
ομεν. εἰ δὲ ἄρα περὶ μηδενὸς τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς 
βουλεύονταϊ, ἐμοὶ μὲν ἔξεστι περὶ ἐμαυτοῦ 
βουλεύεσθαι' ἐμοὶ δέ ἐστι σκέψις περὶ τοῦ 
συμφέροντος. συμφέρει δὲ ἑκάστῳ, τὸ κατὰ τὴν 
ἑαυτοῦ κατασκευὴν καὶ φύσιν" ἡ δὲ ἐμὴ φύσις 
λογικὴ καὶ πολιτική: πόλις καὶ πατρὶς ὡς μὲν 





1 Plutarch (adv. Stoic. ξξ 13, 14) vigorously denounces this 
sophism, as he counts it, of Chrysippus that what 1s evil in 
itself has a value as a foil to the good. He quotes Chrysippus 
(Frag. Phys. 1181 Arnim): 

ὥσπερ γὰρ αἱ κωμωδίαι ἐπιγράμματο γελοῖα φέρουσιν ἃ καθ᾽ 
ἑαῦτα μέν ἐστι φαῦλα, τῷ δὲ ὅλῳ ποιήματι χάριν τινα προστίθησιν, 


184 


BOOK VI 


and ridiculous lime in the play which Chrysippus 
inentions.? 

43. Does the sun take upon himself to discharge 
the functions of the rain? or Asclepius of the 
Fruit-bearer?? And what of each particular star ἢ 
Do they not differ in glory yet co-operate to one 
end ? 

{{ If the Gods have taken counsel about me and 
the things to befall me, doubtless they have taken 
good counsel. For it is not easy even to imagine a 
God without wisdom. And what motive could they 
have impelling them to do me evil? For what advan- 
tage could thercby accrue to them or to the Universe 
which is their special care? Butif the Gods have 
taken no counsel for me individually, vet they have 
in any case done so for the interests of the 
Universe, and I am bound to welcome and make 
the best of8 those things also that befall as a 
necessary curoilary to those interests. But if so be 
they take counsel about nothing at all—an impious 
belef—in good sooth let us have no more of 
sacrifices and prayers and oaths, nor do any other of 
these things every one of which is a recognition 
of the Gods as if they were at our side and dwell- 
ing amongst us—but if so be, I sav, they do not 
take counsel about any of our concerns, it is still 
in my power to take counsel about myself, and 
it is for me to consider my own interest. And 
that is to every man’s interest which is agree- 
able to his own constitution and nature. But my 
nature is rational and civic; my city and country, 
οὕτως ψέξειας ἂν αὐτὴν ep ἑαυτῆς Thy κακίαι!" τοῖς δὲ ἄλλοις οὐκ 
ἄχρηστός ἐστιν. 


9 That is, the Earth, or possibly Demeter. 
ὅν, 888; x. 6, 1} 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


᾿Αντωνίνῳ μοι ἡ Ῥώμη, ὡς δὲ ἀνθρώπῳ ὁ 
κόσμος. τὰ ταῖς πόλεσιν οὖν ταύταις ὠφέλιμα 
μόνα ἐστί μοι ἀγαθά. 

με. Oca ἑκάστῳ συμβαίνει, ταῦτα τῷ ὅλῳ 
συμφέρει" ἤρκει τοῦτο. ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι ἐκεῖνο ὡς ἐπίπαν 
ὄψει παραφυλάξας, ὅσα ἀνθρώπῳ, καὶ ἑτέροις 
ἀνθρώποις. κοινότερον δὲ νῦν τὸ συμφέρον ἐπὶ 
τῶν μέσων λαμβανέσθω. 

᾿ξ: “Ὥσπερ, προσίσταταί σοι τὰ ἐν τῷ ὦμφι- 
θεώτρῳ καὶ τοῖς τοιούτοις χωρίοις, ὡς ἀεὶ τὰ 
αὐτὰ ὁρώμενα, καὶ τὸ ὁμοειδὲς προσκορῆ τὴν 
θέαν ποιεῖ: τοῦτο καὶ ἐπὶ ὅλου τοῦ βίου ΄πάσχειν' 
πάντα γὰρ ἄνω KATO τὰ αὐτὰ καὶ ἐκ τῶν αὐτῶν. 
μέχρι τίνος οὖν; 

ue. “Eyvoee συνεχῶς παντοίους ἀνθρώπους 
καὶ παντοίων μὲν ἐπιτηδευμάτων, παντοδαπῶν δὲ 
ἐθνῶν, τεθνεῶτας: ὥστε κατιέναι τοῦτο μέχρι 
Φιλιστίωνος καὶ Φοίβου καὶ ᾿Οριγανίωνος. 
μέτιθι νῦν ἐπὶ τὰ ἄλλα φῦλα. ἐκεῖ δὴ μετα- 
βαλεῖν ἡμᾶς δεῖ, ὅπου τοσοῦτοι μὲν δεινοὶ 
ῥήτορες, τοσοῦτοι δὲ σεμνοὶ φιλόσοφοι, “Hpa- 
κλειτος, Πυθαγόρας, Σωκράτης" τοσοῦτοι δὲ 
ἥρωες πρότερον, τοσοῦτοι δὲ ὕστερον -στρατηγοί. 
τύραννοι' ἐπὶ τούτοις δὲ Εὔδοξος, * Ἵππαρχος, 
᾿Αρχιμήδης, ἄλλαι φύσεις ὀξεῖαι, μεγαλόφρονες, 
φιλόπονοι, πανοῦργοι, αὐθάδεις, αὐτῆς τῆς ἐπικήρ- 


iv. 8; x. 6 ete. 

27. indifferent, neither good nor bad. 

* A personal touch. See Fronto, ad Caes. iv. 12° theatro 
libros lectatahas; τὶ, 6, tdem theatrum, vem oduene (0 ἰ. 
ofum) , ep ou 10; Naber, p 34; ep. Capit. χν. 8 1. 

1Α Cyme philosopher of Gadara His Syrian compatriot, 
Lucian, the prmce of mockers, was yet alive and mocking. 


156 


BOOK Vi 


as Antoninus, is Rome; as a ian, the world. The 
things then that are of advantage to these com- 
munities, these, and no other, are good for me. 

45. All that befalls the Individual is to the 
interest of the Whole also.! So far, so good. 
But * further careful observation will shew thee 
that, as a general rule, what is to the interest 
of one man is also to the interest of other men. 
But in this case the word ixferesi must be taken in 
a more general sense as it applies to intermediate 3 
things. 

16. As the shows in the amphitheatre and such 
places grate upon thee*® as being an everlasting 
repetition of the same sight, and the similarity makes 
the spectacle pall, such must be the effect of the 
whole of life. For everything above and below is 
ever the same and the result of the sane things. 
How long then ? 

+7. Never lose sight of the fact that men of all 
kinds, of all sorts of vocations and of every race 
under heaven, are dead: and so carry thy thought 
down even to Philistion and Phoebus and Origanion. 
Now turn to the other tribes of men. We must 
pass at last to the same bourne whither so many 
wonderful crators have gone, so many grave philo- 
sophers, Herachtus, Pythagoras, Socrates : so many 
heroes of old time, and so many warriors, so many 
tyrants of later days: and besides them, Eudoxus, 
Hipparehus, Archimedes, and other acute natures, 
men of large nunds, lovers of toil, men of versatile 
powers, men of strong will, mockers, like Menippus * 


ep. Luc. Pise 26, where the Schohast (Arethas) refers to 
this passage Diog. Laert. mentions a Meleager, the con- 
temporary of Menippus. as a writer of similar character. 


tej 
Fl 
~I 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ou καὶ ἐφημέρου τῶν ἀνθρώπων ζωῆς χλευαασταΐ, 
οἷον ΔΙένιππος καὶ ὅσοι τοιοῦτοι. περὶ πάντων 
τούτων ἐννόει, OTL πάλαι κεῖνται. τί οὖν τοῦτο 
δεινὸν αὐτοῖς; τί δαὶ τοῖς μηδ᾽ ὀνομαΐζομένοις 
ὅλως; “Ev ὧδε πολλοῦ ἄξιον, τὸ μετ᾽ ἀληθείας 
καὶ δικαιοσύνης εὐμενῆ τοῖς ψεύσταις καὶ ἀδίκοις 
διαβιοῦν. 

μη. ὍὍτων εὐφρᾶναι σεαυτὸν θέλῃς, ἐνθυμοῦ 
τὰ προτερήματα τῶν συμβιούντων" οἷον τοῦ μὲν 
τὸ δραστήριον, τοῦ δὲ τὸ αἰδῆμον, τοῦ δὲ τὸ 
εὐμετάδοτον, ἄλλον δὲ ἄλλο τι. οὐδὲν γὰρ 
οὕτως εὐφραίνει, ὡς τὰ ὁμοιώματα τῶν ἀρετῶν 
ἐμφαινόμενα τοῖς ἤθεσι τῶν συζώντων καὶ ἀθρόα 
ὡς οἷόν τε συμπίπτοντα. διὸ καὶ πρόχειρα αὐτὰ 
ἑκτέον. 

μθ΄. Μήτι δυσχεραίνεις, ὅτι τοσῶνδέ τινων 
λιτρῶν εἶ καὶ οὐ τριακοσίων; οὕτω δὲ καὶ 
ὅτι μέχρι τοσῶνδε ἐτῶν βιωτέον cot καὶ οὐ 
μέχρι πλείονος: ὥσπερ γὰρ τῆς οὐσίας ὅσον 


, , \ \ a 
ἀφώρισταί σοι στέργεις, οὕτως καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ 


/ 
χρόνου. 
͵ ἴω ‘ f > / a \ λ 
ν΄. Πειρῷ μὲν πείθειν αὐτούς, πρᾶττε δὲ καὶ 
ς ns , ς t 
ἀκόντων, ὅταν τῆς δικαιοσύνης ὁ λόγος οὕτως 
v 2\ a / , > 2 
ἄγῃ. ἐὰν μέντοι βίᾳ τις προσχρώμενος ἐνίστη- 
> λ 2.» \ ” 
ται, μετάβαινε ἐπὶ TO εὐάρεστον καὶ ἄλυπον, 
A \ “A ΓΑ 
καὶ συγχρῶ εἰς ἄλλην ἀρετὴν τῇ κωλύσει" 
7 7 ᾿ ¢ / 7 
καὶ μέμνησο, ὅτι μεθ᾽ ὑπεξαιρέσεως ὥρμας, ὅτι 
a 7 > / ,ὔ 
καὶ τῶν ἀδυνώτων οὐκ ὠρέγου. τίνος οὖν; 
1 τῶν ἀκόντων P: αὐτῶν ἀκ, Menag. 


158 


BOOK VI 


and many another such, of man’s perishable and 
transitory life itself. About all [18 Ἑ reflect that 
they have long smce been in their g graves. What 
terrible thing “then is this for them? What pray 
for those whose very names are unknown? One 
thing on earth is worth much—to live out our 
lives in truth and justice, and in charity with liars 
and unjust men. 

48, When thou wouldst cheer thine heart, think 
upon the good qualities of thy associates!; as for 
instance, this one’s energy, that one’s modesty, the 
generosity of a third, and some other trait of a fourth 
For nothing is so cheering as the images of the 
virtues mirrored in the characters of those who 
live with us, and presenting themselves in as great a 
throng as possible. Have these images then ever 
before thine eyes. 

49. Thou art not aggrieved, art thou, at being so 
many pounds in weight and not three hundred 3 
Then why be aggrieved if thou hast only so many 
years to live and no more? For as thou art con- 
tented with the amount of matter allotted thee, 
so be content also with the time. 

00. Try persuasion first, but even though men 
would say thee nay, act when the principles of 
justice so direct. Should any one however with- 
stand thee by force, take refuge in being well-content 
and unhurt, and utilize the obstacle for the display 
of some other virtue. Recollect that the impulse thou 
hadst was conditioned 2 by circumstances,° and thine 
aim was not to do impossibilities. What then was it? 


1 But cp. v. 10. Pave hae Ae ocee 
ὁ Tat was with a reservation, 1.6. ‘‘ should circumstances 
allow.” cp. iv. 1; vin. 41. 


159 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


“ a Ἂ ἰὼ -“ f ‘ f 
τῆς τοιῶσδέ τινος ὁρμῆς. τούτου de TUYYavers’ 
® is Γ 
ἐφ᾽ οἷς προήχθημεν, ταῦτα γίνεται. 
να΄. Ὃ μὲν φιλόδοξος ἀλλοτρίαν ἐνέργειαν 
¢ 3530, 
ἔδιον ἀγαθὸν ὑπολαμβάνει, ὁ δὲ φιλήδονος ἰδίων 
“ A / Ὺὰ 
πεῖσιν' ὁ δὲ νοῦν ἔχων ἰδίαν πρᾶξιν. 
Sf WEN \ , δὲ e 
vio. ᾿Βξεστι περὶ τούτου μηδὲν ὑπολαμ- 
A Fae es Ἂν a a ee \ \ 
Bavew καὶ μὴ ὀχλεῖσθαι TH ψυχῇ" αὐτὰ yap τὰ 
\ ἌᾺ 
πράώγμωῳτα οὐκ ἔχει φύσιν ποιητικὴν τῶν ἡμετέρων 
κρίσεων. 
f 4 Ν \ a“ ¢ ’ ef 
νγ΄. ἔθισον σεαυτὸν πρὸς τῷ ud ἑτέρου 
or 
λεγομένῳ γίνεσθαι ἀπαρενθυμήτως Kal ὡς οἷόν 
“ lo n “ 
τε ἐν τῇ ψυχῆ τοῦ λέγοντος γίνου. 
vo. Τὸ τῷ σμήνει μὴ συμφέρον οὐδὲ τῇ 
ἊΝ Peet ee 4) i} φέρ 1) 
μελίσση συμφέρει. 
I rt ἴω ξ ἴω Ἃ ) 7 
ve. Ee κυβερνῶντα οἱ ναῦται ἢ ἰατρεύοντα 
¢ , Ὁ δ of \ ὮΝ 
οἱ κάμνοντες κακῶς ἔλεγον, ἄλλῳ τινὶ ἂν 
“ 4 3 ΤᾺ 7 ἌᾺ 
προσεῖχον ἢ πῶς αὐτὸς ἐνεργοίη τὸ τοῖς ἐμπλέ 
/ x a 
ουὐσ, σωτήριον ἢ τὸ τοῖς θεραπευομένοις 
/ 
ὑγιεινὸν; 
’ “ ? Ὁ n / 
vs. Πόσοι, μεθ᾽ ὧν εἰσῆλθον εἰς τὸν κόσμον, 
ἤδη ἀπεληλύθασιν. 
“ 9 a) \ / Ν / \ 
ve’. ᾿Ϊκτεριῶσι τὸ μέλε πικρὸν φαίνεται: καὶ 
λυσσοδήκτοις τὸ ὕδωρ φοβερόν: καὶ “παιδίοις τὸ 
,ὔ / i / ᾿ “Ὁ 
σφαιρίον καλόν. τί οὖν ὀργίζομαι; ἢ δοκεῖ σοι 
δ > 7 Ν f Ἃ Ν , [οὶ 
ἔλασσον ἰσχύειν τὸ διεψευσμένον ἢ τὸ χόλιον τῷ 
a) ig \ fe) 
ἰκτεριῶντι καὶ ὁ ἰὸς τῷ AVTTOOHKTO; 
͵ Ν Ἀ fal κι 
vn. Κατὰ τὸν λόγον τῆς σῆς φύσεως βιοῦν σε 
1 Lf προσεῖχον is Ist pers. sing. we must with Richards 


read évepyoiny and understand ἐμὲ with κυβερνῶντα : πῶς 
v ἄς 
ἄν τις Schenk] 


t60 


BOOK VI 


To feel some such impulse as thou didst. In that 
thou art successful. That which alone was in the 
sphere of our choice ! is realized. 

51. The lover of glory conceives his own good to 
consist in another’s action, the lover of pleasure in 
his own feelings, but the possessor of understanding 
in his own actions. 

52. We need not form any opinion about the thing 
in question or be harassed in soul, for Nature 
gives the thing itself no power to compel our 
judgments. 

53. Train thyself to pay careful attention to what 
is being said * by another and as far as possible enter 
into his soul. 

54. That which is not in the interests of the hive 
cannot be in the interests of the bee.® 

55. If the salors spoke ill of a steersman or the 
sick of a physician, what else would they have in 
mind but how the man should best effect the safety 
of the crew or the health of his patients ? 

56. How many have already left the world who 
came into it with me! 

57. To the jaundiced honey tastes bitter ; and the 
victim of hydrophobia has a horror of water; and to 
little children their ball is a treasure. Why then 
angry? Or dost thou think that error is ἃ less 
potent factor than bile in the jaundiced and virus in 
the victim of rabies? 

58. From living according to the reason of thy 
nature no one can prevent thee: contrary to the 


1 Casaubon translates ‘that for which we were brought 
into the world,” but can προάγω mean this? 
2 Obviously no contradiction of iv. 18 ete. See also vin. 


4, 30. ἄν, 22 
161 


te, 
Lael] 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


> \ f \ \ , κ᾿ ᾽ν 
υὐδεὶς κωλύσει: παρὰ τὸν λόγον τῆς κοινῆς 
“ 7 
φύσεως οὐδὲν σοι συμβὴήσεται. 

@ »ὕὔ / / 4 
νθ΄. Οἷοί εἰσιν, οἷς θέλουσιν ἀρέσκειν, καὶ δι 

Ὁ / \ 2 7 ral 
ola περιγινόμενα, καὶ δι’ οἵων ἐνεργειῶν. ws 

f τ aN ’ ΄ \ δ΄ 3 / 

ταχέως ὁ αἰὼν πάντα καλύψει" καὶ ὅσα ἐκάλυψεν 


ἤδη. 


162 


BOOK VI 


reason of the Universal Nature nothing shall befall 
thee 

59. The persons men wish to please,! the objects 
they wish lo gain, the means they employ—think of 
the character of all these! How soon will Tine 
hide all things! How many a thing has it already 


hidden ! 
vit. 62. 


BIBAION Z 


5 \ 


α΄. Τί ἐστὶ κακία; τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν, ὃ πολλάκις εἶδες. 
καὶ ἐπὶ παντὸς δὲ τοῦ συμβαίνοντος πρόχειρον 
ἔχε, ὅτι τοῦτό ἐστιν, ὃ πολλάκις εἶδες. ὅχως ἄνω 
κάτω τὰ αὐτὰ εὑρήσεις, ὧν μεσταὶ αἱ ἱστορίαι αἱ 
παλαιαΐ, αἱ μέσαι, αἱ ὑπόγνιοι: ὧν νῦν μεσταὶ αἱ 
πόλεις καὶ «αἵ»: οἰκίαι. οὐδὲν καινόν: πάντα 
καὶ συνήθη καὶ ὀλεγοχρόνια. 

Ὡς; “π᾿ τὰ δόγματα πῶς ἄχλως δύναται 
νεκρωθῆναι, ἐὰν μὴ αἱ κατάλληλοι αὐτοῖς φαν- 
τασίαι σβεσθῶσιν ; ἃς διηνεκῶς ἀναζξωπυρεῖν ἐπὶ 
σοί ἐστι. δύναμαι περὶ τούτου, ὃ δεῖ, ὑπολαμβάν- 
ev εἰ δ᾽ ἄρα" δύναμαι, τί ταράσσομαι; τὰ 
ἔξω τῆς ἐμῆς διανοίας οὐδὲν ὅλως πρὸς τὴν ἐμὴν 
διάνοιαν. τοῦτο μάθε καὶ ὀρθὸς εἶ. 

᾿Ανα βιῶναι σοι ἔξεστιν" ioe πάλιν τὰ πράγ- 
ματα, ὡς ἑώρας" ἐν τούτῳ γὰρ τὸ ἀναβιῶναι. 

γ΄. Ἰομπῆς κενοσπουδία, ἐπὶ σκηνῆς δράματα, 
ποίμνια, ἀγέλαι, διαδορατισμοί,' κυνιδίοις ὀστάρ- 
Lov ἐρριμένον, ψωμίον εἰς τὰς τῶν ἰχθύων δεξα- 
μενάς, μυρμήκων ταλαιπωρίαι καὶ ἀχθοφορίαι, 


1 <ai> Cor. 

24H A: ἢ Schenkl : omit. P: πῶς yap A omit. P: πῶς ye 
Schenk]. ὁ γὰρ A: δ᾽ ἄρα Schenkl. 

+ After διαδορατισμοὶ Lofft ingeniously inserts τί εἰσι μοι, 
τί ἐμοὶ ; Schenkl. 


164 


BOOK VII 


1. Waar is vice? A familiar sight enough. So 
in everything that befalls have the thought ready: 
This is a familiar sight. Look up, look down, every- 
where thou wilt find the same things, whereof 
histories ancient, medieval, and inodern are full; and 
full of them at this day are cities and heuses. There 
is no new thing underthe sun.! Everything 1s stereo- 
typed, everything fleeting. 

2. How else can thy axioms be made dead than 
by the extinction of the ideas that answer to them? 
And these it hes with thee ever to kindle anew into 
flame. I am competent to form the true conception 
of a thing. If so, why am 1 harassed? What is out- 
side the scope of my mind has absolutely no concern 
with my mind. Learn this lesson and thou siandest 
erect. 

Thou canst begin a new life! See but things 
atresh as thou usedst to see them; for in this consists 
the new life. 

3. Empty love of pageantry, stage-plays, flocks 
and herds, sham-fights, a bone thrown to lap-dogs, 
crumbs cast in a fish-pond, painful travail of ants and 
their bearing of burdens, skurryings of scared little 


' Keeles. 1.9 cp. also Justin’s A pol. 1. 57, addressed to 
Pius and Mareus, 


105 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


μνυιδίων ἐπτοημένων διαδρομαί, σιγιλλάρια νευρο- 
σπαστούμενα. χρὴ ovr ἐν τούτοις εὐμενῶς μὲν καὶ 
μὴ καταφρυαττόμενον ἑστάναι" παρακολουθεῖν 
μέντοι, ὅτι τοσούτου ἄξιος ἕκαστός ἐστιν, ὅσον 
ἀξιά ἐστι ταῦτα, περὶ ἃ ἐσπούδακεν. 

δ. Δεῖ κατὰ λέξιν παρακολουθεῖν τοῖς λεγο- 
μένοις, καὶ καθ᾽ ἑκάστην ὁρμὴν τοῖς γινομένοις. 
καὶ ἐπὶ μὲν τοῦ ἑτέρου εὐθὺς ὁρᾶν, ἐπὶ τίνα 
σκοπὸν ἡ ἀναφορά' ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ ἑτέρου παρα- 
φυλάσσειν, τί τὸ σημαινόμενον. 

ε΄. Πότερον ἐξαρκεῖ ἡ διάνοιά μου πρὸς τοῦτο 
ἢ οὗ; εἰ μὲν ἐξαρκεῖ, χρῶμαι αὐτῇ πρὸς τὸ ἔργον, 
ὡς ὀργάνῳ παρὰ τῆς τῶν ὅλων φύσεως δοθέντι. 
εἰ δὲ μὴ ἐξαρκεῖ, ἤτοι παραχωρῶ τοῦ ἔργου τῷ 
δυναμένῳ κρεῖττον ἐπιτελέσαι, ἐὰν ἄλλως τοῦτο 
μὴ καθήκῃ, ἢ πράσσω, ὡς δύναμαι, προσπαρα- 
λαβὼν τὸν δυνάμενον κατὰ πρόσχρησιν τοῦ ἐμοῦ 
ἡγεμονικοῦ ποιῆσαι τὸ εἰς τὴν κοινωνίαν νῦν 
καίριον, καὶ χρήσιμον. ὅ τι γὰρ ἂν δι᾽ ἐμαυτοῦ 
ἢ συν ἄλλῳ ποιῶ, ὧδε μόνον χρὴ συντείνειν, εἰς 
τὸ κοινῇ χρήσιμον καὶ εὐάρμοστον. 

ς΄. Ὅσοι μὲν πολυύμνητοι, γενόμενοι ἤδη 
λήθῃ παραδέδονται: ὅσοι δὲ τούτους ὑμνήσαντες 
πάλαι ἐκποδών. 

! \ > 7 f / , 
ζ΄. Μὴ αἰσχύνου βοηθούμενος" πρόκειται yap 
σοι ἐνεργεῖν τὸ ἐπιβάχλον ὡς στρατιώτῃ ἐν 
τειχομαχίᾳ. τί οὖν, ἐὰν σὺ μὲν χωλαίνων ἐπὶ 
τὴν ἔπαλξιν ἄνα βῆναι μόνος μὴ δύνῃ, σὺν ἄλλῳ 
δὲ δυνατὸν ἢ τοῦτο; 





1 41, 2 ete. 2 ep.3x 41 (Kpicurus). 
ev 16.. ep, Dem. Olynth. ui 32: ἅττα yap ἂν τὰ ἐπιτηδ- 


166 


BOOK VII 


mice, puppets moved by strings.| Amid such en- 
vironment therefore thou must take thy place 
graciously and not ‘snorting defiance,’? nay thou 
must keep abreast of the fact that everyone is worth 
just so much as those things are worth in which he 
is interested.® 

4. In conversation keep abreast of what is being 
said,* and, in every effort, of what is being done. 
In the latter see from the first to what end it has 
reference, and in the former be careful to catch the 
meaning. 

5. Is iy mind competent for this or not? If com- 
petent, I apply it to the task as an instrument given 
me by the Universal Nature. If not competent, 
I ether withdraw from the work in favour of some- 
one who can accomplish it better, unless for other 
reasons duty forbids; or I do the best [ can, taking 
to assist me any one that can utilize my ruling Reason 
to effect what is at the moment seasonable and useful 
for the common welfsre. For in whatsoever I do 
either by myself or with another [ must direct my 
energies to this alone, that it shall conduce to the 
common interest 5 and be in harmony with it. 

6. How many much-lauded heroes have already 
been given as a prey unto forgetfulness,® and how 
many that lauded them have long ago disappeared | 

7. Blush not to be helped’; for thou art bound to 
carry out the task that is laid upon thee as a soldier 
to storm the breach. What then, if for verv lame- 
ness thou canst not mount the ramparts unaided, but 
canst do this with another’s help? 
εὐματα τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἧ, τοιοῦτον ἀναγκὴ καὶ τὸ φρόνημα ἔχειν. 
ey Clem. Alex, Strom iv 23 4vi 53. 2-1N,. Aa, 

Oa Ts τὖνὶ Bae wat 9], 7x 12. See sayme of 
Marcus, Capit. axu. 4, quoted below, p. 3860 


167 


MARCUS AURELIUS 
ἡ. Τὰ μέλλοντα μὴ ταρασσέτω" ἥξεις yap ἐπ᾽ 
αὐτά, ἐὰν δεήσῃ, φέρων τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον, ᾧ νῦν 
πρὸς τὰ παρόντα χρᾷ. 

0. Πάντα ἀλλήλοις ἐπιπλέκεται καὶ ἡ σύνδεσις 
ἱερά, καὶ σχεδόν τί οὐδὲν ἀλλότριον ἄλλο ἄλλῳ. 
συγκατατέτακται γὰρ καὶ συγκοσμεῖ τὸν αὐτὸν 
κόσμον. κόσμος TE γὰρ εἷς ἐξ ἃ ἁπάντων, καὶ θεὸς 
εἷς διὰ πάντων, καὶ οὐσία μία, καὶ νόμος εἷς, 
λόγος κοινὸς πάντων τῶν νοερῶν ζῴων, καὶ 
ἀλήθεια μία: εἴγε καὶ τελειότης μία τῶν ὁμο- 
γενῶν καὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ λόγου μετεχόντων ζῴων. 

“. Πᾶν τὸ ἔνυλον ἐναφανίξεται τάχιστα τῇ 
τῶν ὅλων οὐσίᾳ: καὶ πᾶν αἴτιον εἰς τὸν τῶν ὅλων 
λόγον τάχιστα ἀναλαμβάνεται" καὶ παντὸς 
μνήμη τάχιστα ἐγκαταχώννυται. τῷ αἰῶνι. 

να΄. Τῷ λογικῷ ζῴῳ ἡ αὐτὴ πρᾶξις κατὰ 
φύσιν ἐστὶ καὶ κατὰ λόγον. 

ι΄. ᾿ρθὸς ἢ ἢ * ὀρθούμενος. 

uy. Οἵόν ἐστιν ἐν ἡνωμένοις τὰ μέλη τοῦ 
σώματος, τοῦτον ἔχει τὸν λόγον ἐν διεστῶσι τὰ 
λογικὰ πρὸς μίαν τινὰ συνεργίαν κατεσκευασ- 
μένα. μᾶλλον δέ σοι ἢ τούτου νόησις προσπεσεῖ- 
τῶι, ἐὰν πρὸς ἑαυτὸν πολλάκις λέγῃς, ὅτι “μέλος ᾿᾿ 
εἰμὶ τοῦ ἐκ τῶν λογικῶν συστήματος. ἐὰν δὲ [διὰ 
τοῦ ῥῶ στοιχείου " μέρος᾽ εἶναι ἑαυτὸν λέγῃς, 
οὔπω ἀπὸ καρδίας φιλεῖς τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, οὔπω 
σε καταληκτικῶς " εὐφραίνει τὸ εὐεργετεῖν' ETL? ὡς 

1 μὴ Cas. 
2 καταληπτικῶς (‘assured dehght”) PA: em. Gat. 
3 ἔτι εἰ ὡς A. 
1 vi, 38, 2 iv, 45, ὅν, de 
τὰ Τὺ > Sen. de Vit Beat.s8. 


168 


BOOK VII 


Be not disquieted about the future. If thou 
must come thither, thou wilt come armed with the 
same reason which thou appliest now to the present. 

9. All things are mutually intertwined,! and the 
tie is sacred, and scarcely anything is alien the one 
to the other. For all things have been ranged 
side by side,? and together help to order one ordered 
Universe. For there is both one Universe, made up 
of all things, and one God immanent in all things, 
and one Substance, and one Law, one Reason 
common to all intelligent creatures,? and one Truth, 
if indeed there is also one perfecting of living 
creatures that have the same origin and share the 
same reason. 

10. A little while and all that is maternal is lost to 
sight in the Substance of the Universe,’ a little 
while and all Cause is taken back into the Reason of 
the Universe, a little while and the remenibrance of 
everything is encairned im Eternity. 

11 To the rational creature the same act is at 
ee e according to nature and ae to reason. 

2. Uprig oht, or made upright." 

13, The pr inciple which obtains where limbs and 
hody unite to form one organism, holds good also 
for rational things with their separate individualities, 
constituted as they are to work in conjunction 
But the perception of this shall come more home to 
thee, if thou sayest to thyself, I am a fm) of the 
organized body of rational things. But if [using the 
letter R] thou sayest thou art but a part,’ not yet 
dost thou love mankind from the heart, nor yet 
does well-doing delight thee for its own sakes Thou 


Sep vit 73 but seem, ὦ 
7 The pun mav be kept ly laneb—rom. sary ae een) 


169 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ῃ > \ \ nA yo \ ® 
πρέπον αὐτὸ ψιλὸν ποιεῖς" οὕπω ὡς σαυτὸν εὖ 
ποιῶν. 

ιδ΄. O θέλει, ἔξωθεν προσπιπτέτω τοῖς 
παθεῖν ἐκ τῆς προσπτώσεως ταύτης δυναμένοις. 
ἐκεῖνα γάρ, ἐὰν θελήσῃ, μέμψεται τὰ παθόντα' 
ἐγὼ δέ, ἐὰν μὴ ὑπολάβω, ὅτι κακὸν τὸ συμβε. 
βηκός, οὔπω βέβλαμμαι. ἔξεστι δέ μοι μὴ 
ὑπολαβεῖν. 

ιε΄. Ὅ τι ἄν τις ποιῇ ἢ λέγῃ, ἐμὲ δεῖ ὠγαθὸν 
εἷναι" ὡς ἂν εἰ ὁ χρυσὸς ἢ ὃ σμάραγδος i ἡ πορ- 
φύρα τοῦτο ἀεὶ ἔλεγεν, 00 τι ἄν Tes ποιῇ ἢ λέγῃ, 
ἐμὲ δεῖ σμάραγδον εἶναι καὶ τὸ ἐμαυτοῦ χρῶμα 
ἔχειν." 

is. To ἡγεμονικὸν αὐτὸ ἑαυτῷ οὐκ ἐνοχλεῖ, 
οἷον λέγω, οὐ φορεῖ +} ἑαυτὸ εἰς ἐπιθυμίαν. "εἰ δέ 
τις ἄλλος αὐτὸ φοβῆσαι ἢ λυπῆσαι δύναται, 
ποιείτω. αὐτὸ γὰρ ἑαυτὸ ὑποληπτικῶς οὐ τρέψει 
εἰς τοιαύτας τροπάς. 

Τὸ σωμάτιον μὴ πάθῃ τι, αὐτὸ μεριμνάτω, 
εἰ δύναται, καὶ λεγέτω, εἴ TL πάσχει: τὸ δὲ 
ψυχάριον, τὸ φοβούμενον, τὸ λυπούμενον, τὸ περὶ 
τούτων ὅλως ὑπολαμβάνον οὐδὲν μὴ πάθη: οὐ γὰρ 
ἕξις αὐτῷ 2 εἰς κρίσιν τοιαύτην. 

᾿Απροσδεές ἐστιν, ὅσον ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῷ, τὸ ἡγεμον- 
ικόν, ἐὰν μὴ ἑαυτῷ ἔνδειαν ποιῇ" κατὰ ταὐτὰ δὲ 
καὶ ἀτάραχον. καὶ ἀνεμπόδιστον, ἐὰν μὴ ἑαυτὸ 
ταράσσῃ καὶ ἐμποδίζῃ. 

ιζ΄. ἙἘδαιμονία ἐστὲ δαίμων ἀγαθὸς ἢ 
«ἡγεμονικὸν» ἀγαθόν. τί οὖν ὧδε ποιεῖς, 

1 φοβεῖ PA: σοβεῖ Schenk!: I suggest φορεῖ or τρέπει 


* ἕξεις αὐτὸ ῬΑ’ ἕξις αὐτῷ Schenkl- ἕλξεις Schultz, 
> «ἡγεμονικὸν» Gat. 


170 


BOOK VII 


dost practise it still as a bare duty, not yet as a boon 
to thyself. 

14. Let any external thing, that will, be incident 
to whatever is able to feel this incidence. For that 
which feels can, if it please, complain.! But I, 
if I do not consider what has befallen me to be 
an evil,’ am still unhurt. AndI can refuse so to 
consider it. 

15, Let any say or do what he will, I must for my 
part be good. So might the emerald—or gold or 
purple—never tire of repeating, /Vhatever any one 
shall do or say, 1 musl be an enerala and keep my 
colour, 

16. The ruling Reason is never the disturber of 
its own peace, never, for instance, hurries itself into 
lust. But τῇ another can cause it fear or pain, let 
it do so” For it will not let its own assumptions 
lead it mto such aberrations 

Let the body take thought for itself, if it may, 
that 1 suffer no hurt and, if it do so suffer, let it 
proclaim the Τοῦ; But the soul that has the faculty 
of fear, the faculty of pain, and alone can assume 
that these exist, can never suffer; for it is not given 
to making any such admission. ! 

In itself the ruling Reason wants for nothing 
unless it create its own needs, and in like manner 
nothing can disturb it, nothing impede it, unless the 
disturbance or impediment come from itself. 

11. Well-being® is a good Being, or a ruling 
Reason that is good. W hat then doest thou here, 


1 vn. 38; viti. 28 5.ν, 7, 89. ὁ vil. 14, 33. 
ἔν, 623 vin 14, 83; vin. 40 ete. 


a ΠΕ ποῖ by Chrysippus as ‘harmony of our δαίμων with 
God’s will,” 


171 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ὦ φαντασία ; ; ἀπέρχου, τοὺς θεούς σοι, ὡς ἦλθες: 
οὐ γὰρ χρήξω σου. ἐλήλυθας δὲ κατὰ τὸ 
ἀρχαῖον ἔθος. οὐκ ὀργίξομαί σοί" "μόνον ἄπιθι. 
in. Φοβεῖταί tis μεταβολήν ; » τί γὰρ δύναται 
χωρὶς μεταβολῆς. γενέσθαι; τί δὲ φίλτερον ἢ 
οἰκειότερον τῇ τῶν ὅλων φύσει; σὺ δὲ αὐτὸς 
λούσασθαι δύνασαι, ἐὰν μὴ τὰ ξύλα μεταβάλῃ ; 
\ 
τραφῆναι δὲ δύνασαι, ἐὰν μὴ τὰ ἐδ ω δὲ πὸ 
μεταβάλῃ; ἄλλο δέ TL τῶν χρησίμων δύναται 
συντελεφθῆναι χωρὶς μεταβολῆς ; οὐχ ὁρᾷς οὗν, 
ὅτι καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ σὲ μεταβαλεῖν ὅμοιὸν ἐστι καὶ 
΄ὰ »Ἤ “ ¢ / 
ὁμοίως ar’ ᾿γκαῖον τῇ τῶν ὅλων “φύσει ; 

ιθ΄. Διὰ τῆς τῶν ὅλων οὐσίας ὡς διὰ χειμάρ- 
ρου, διεκπτορεύεται, πάντα τὰ σώματα, τῷ ὅλῳ 
συμφυῆ καὶ συνεργά, ὡς τὰ ἡμέτερα μέρη ἀλλ oes. 

[Πόσους ἤδη ὁ αἰὼν Χρυσίππους, πόσους 
Σωκρώτεις, πόσους “Emixtntous κατωπέπωκεν. 
τὸ δ᾽ αὐτὸ καὶ ἐπὶ παντὸς οὑτινοσοῦν σοι 
ἀνθρώπου τε καὶ πράγματος προσπιπτέτω. 

κ. μὲ ἕν μόνον TEPLO TC, μὴ TL αὐτὸς 
-ποιήσω, ὃ ἡ κατασκευὴ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου οὐ θέλει, ἢ 
e 3 f δὰ ζω 3 f 
ὡς οὐ θέλει, ἢ ὃ νῦν ov θέλει. 
’ > \ \ ξ \ \ ΄ / 
κα. “Eryyus μὲν ἡ σὴ περὶ πάντων λήθη" 
ἐγγὺς δὲ ἡ πάντων περὶ σοῦ λήθη. 
/ "TS 3 θ , al \ \ / 
Kp. dtov ἀνθρώπου φιλεῖν καὶ τοὺς πταί- 
οντῶς. τοῦτο δὲ γίνεται, ἐὰν συμπροσπίπτῃ σοι, 

Ye wii. 99; ¢ Ps iy ia XXXvil. 3. 

2-1, 43 v. v1 15. 

3 Referred some (see Zeller, Stoics,p 158, Engl trans.) 
to the theory that at each cyclical regeneration of the world 
nee same persons and events repeat themselves. But see 

. 3l 

“+ Aul Gelhus πὶ 18 speaks of Epict. as recently dead ; 


172 


BOOK VII 


O Imagination?! Avaunt, in God’s name, as thou 
eamest, for I desire thee not! But thou art come 
according to thine ancient wont. I bear thee no 
malice ; only depart from me! 

18. Does a man shrink from change? Why, what 
can come into being save by changer What be 
nearer or dearer to the Nature of the Universe? 
Canst thou take a hot bath unless the wood for the 
furnace suffer a change? Couldst thou be fed, if 
thy food suffered no change, and can any of the 
needs of life be provided for apart from change? 
Seest thou not that ἃ personal change is similar, and 
similarly necessary to the Nature of the Universe ὃ 

19. Through the universal Substance as through 
a rushing torrent? all bodies pass on their way, 
united with the Whole in nature and activity, as 
our members are with one another. 

How many a Chrysippus,* how many a Socrates, 
how many an Epictetus* hath Time already de- 
voured! Whatsoever man thou hast to do with and 
whatsoever thing, let the same thought strike thee. 

20. [ am concerned about one thing only, that 
I of myself do not what man’s constitution does 
not will, or wills not now, or in a way that it wills 
not. 

21, A little while and thou wilt have forgotten 
everything, a little while and everything will have 
forgotten thee. 

22. It is a man’s especial privilege® to love even 
those who stumble. And this love follows as soon as 


Them. Or. v. p. 63 D. implies that he was alive under the 
Antonines. Lucian, adv. Ind. 13 speaks of his earthenware 
lamp having been bought by an admirer for 3,000 drachmas. 
5 Fronto, ad Ver. un 2: Hominis maxime proprium 

ignoscere. cp. St. Matt. v.44; Dio 71. 26, § 3, 
173 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ὅτι καὶ συγγενεῖς καὶ δι’ ἄγνοιαν καὶ ἄκοντες 
ἁμαρτάνουσι, καὶ ὡς μετ᾽ “ὀλίγον ἀμφότεροι 
τεθνήξεσθε, καὶ πρὸ πάντων, ὅτι οὐκ ἔβλαψέ σε" 
οὐ γὰρ τὸ ἡγεμονικόν σου χεῖρον ἐποίησεν, ἢ 
πρόσθεν ἦν. — ΝΞ " 
ny. H τῶν ὅλων φύσις ἐκ τῆς ὅλης οὐσίας, 
ὡς κηροῦ, νῦν μὲν ἱππάριον ἔπλασε, συγχέασα δὲ 
τοῦτο εἰς δενδρύφιον ! συνεχρήσατο τῇ ὕλῃ αὐτοῦ, 
εἶτα εἰς ἀνθρωπάριον, εἶτα εἰς ἄλλο τι ἕκαστον 
δὲ τούτων πρὸς ὀλίγιστον ὑπέστη. δεινὸν δὲ 
οὐδὲν τὸ διαλυθῆναι τῷ κιβωτίῳ, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ τὸ 
συμπαγῆναι." 

KO. Τὸ ἐπίκοτον τοῦ προσώπου λίαν παρὰ 
φύσιν, ΞῸΞ ὅταν πολλάκις + ἐνῇ, ἀποθνήσκει δὴ 
πρόσχημα," ἢ τὸ τελευταῖον ἀπεσβέσθη, ὥστε 
ὅλως ἐξαφθῆναι μὴ δύνασθαι. αὐτῷ γε τούτῳ 
παρακολουθεῖν πειρῶ, ὅτι παρὰ τὸν λόγον. εἰ 
γὰρ καὶ 7 συναίσθησις τοῦ ἁμαρτάνειν οἰχήσεται, 
τίς ἔτι τοῦ ζῆν αἰτία; 

κε΄. Πάντα, ὅσα ὁρᾷς, ὅσον οὔπω μεταβαλεῖ 
ἡ τὰ ὅλα διοικοῦσα φύσις, καὶ ἄλλα ἐκ τῆς οὐσίας 
αὐτῶν ποιήσει, καὶ πάλιν ἄλλα ἐκ τῆς ἐκείνων 
οὐσίας, ἵνα ἀεὶ νεαρὸς ἢ ὁ κόσμος. 

κε΄. “Otay τις ἁμάρτῃ τι εἰς σέ, εὐθὺς ἐνθυμοῦ, 
τί ἀγαθὸν ἢ κακὸν ὑπολαβὼν ἥμαρτεν. τοῦτο γὰρ 
ἰδὼν ἐλεήσεις αὐτόν, καὶ οὔτε θαυμάσεις, οὔτε 


1 δένδρου φύσιν PA: δενδρύφιον Nauck. 

2. «ἀγαθὺν:- after συμπαγῆναι Kronenberg. 

3 ὅταν πολλάκις ἐναποθνήσκειν ἦ πρόσχημα PA: ὅθεν πολλάκις 
ἐναποθνήσκει τὸ πρόσχημα Fournier: 1 have patched up this 
incurable passage, as above. Possibly ἤδη would be better 


than δή. 
174 


BOOK VII 


thou reflectest that they are of kin to thee and 
that they do wrong involuntarily and through 
ignorance,! and that within a little while both 
they and thou will be dead ?; and this, above all, 
that the man has done thee no hurt®; for he has 
not made thy ruling Reason worse than it was 
before. 

23. The Nature of the Whole out of the Substance 
of the Whole,* as out of wax, moulds at one time 
a horse, and breaking up the mould kneads the 
material up again into a tree, then into a man, 
aud then into something else; and every one of 
these subsists but for a moment. It is no more a 
hardship for the coffer to be broken up than it 
was for it to be fitted together. 

94. An angry scowl on the face is beyond measure 
unnatural, and when it is often seen there, all 
comeliness begins at once to die away, or in the end 
is so utterly extinguished that it can never be re- 
kindled at all From this very fact try to reach the 
conclusion that it is contrary to reason. The con- 
sciousness of wrong-domg once lost, what motive is 
left for living any more? 

95. Everything that thou seest will the Nature 
that controls the Universe change, no one knows 
how soon, and out of its substance make other 
compounds,’ and again others out of theirs, that the 
world may ever renew its youth. 

26 Does a man do thee wrong? Go to and mark 
what notion of good and evil was his that did the 
wrong. Once perceive that and thou wilt feel 


τῳ St Luke xxin 534. 
* av. 6 δ), bes. 85 
ἔγῃ, 25. ep. St. Paul, Rom 1x 20. ὅ Wily 23, 


175 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


2 / ” Ν Ν > \ \ > \N\ 3 7 
ὀργισθήσῃ. ἤτοι γὰρ καὶ αὐτὸς τὸ αὐτὸ ἐκείνῳ 
ἀγαθὸν ἔτι ὑπολαμβάνεις ἢ ἄλλο ὁμοειδές. δεῖ 
οὖν συγγινώσκειν. εἰ δὲ μηκέτι ὑπολαμβάνεις τὰ 
τοιαῦτα ἀγαθὰ καὶ κακά, ῥᾷον εὐμενὴς ἔσῃ τῷ 
παρορῶντι. 

κζ΄. Μὴ τὰ ἀπόντα ἐννοεῖν, ὡς ἤδη] ὄντα" ἀλλὰ 
τῶν παρόντων τὰ δεξιώτατα ἐκλογίξεσθαι καὶ 
τούτων χάριν ὑπομιμνήσκεσθαι, πῶς ἂν ἐπεξητ- 
εἰτο, εὐ μὴ παρῆν. aa μέντοι φυλάσσου, μὴ 
διὰ τοῦ οὕτως ἀσμενίζειν αὐτοῖς ἐθίσῃς ἐκτιμᾶν 
αὐτά, ὥστε, ἐάν ποτε μὴ παρῇ, ταραχθήσεσθαι. 

κη. Kis σαυτὸν συνειλοῦ. φύσιν ἔχει τὸ 
λογικὸν ἡγεμονικόν, ἑαυτῷ ἀρκεῖσθαι δικαιο- 
πραγοῦντι καὶ παρ᾽ αὐτὸ τοῦτο γαλήνην ἔχοντι. 

κθ΄. ἐξάλειψον τὴν φαντασίαν. στῆσον τὸν 
νευροσπαστίαν. περίγρωψον τὸ ἐνεστὼς τοῦ 
χρόνου. γνώρισον τὸ συμβαῖνον ἢ σοὶ ἢ ἄλλῳ. 
δίελε καὶ μέρισον τὸ ὑποκείμενον εἰς τὸ αἰτιῶδες 
καὶ ὑλικόν. ἐννόησον τὴν ἐσχάτην ὥραν. τὸ 
ἐκείνῳ ἁμαρτηθὲν ἐκεῖ κατάλιπε, ὅπου ἡ ἁμαρτία 
ὑπέστη. 

λ΄. Συμπαρεκτείνειν τὴν νόησιν τοῖς λεγομέν- 
ous. εἰσδύεσθαι τὸν νοῦν εἰς τὰ γινόμενα καὶ 
ποιοῦντα. 

λα΄. Φαίδρυνον σεαυτὸν ἁπλότητι καὶ αἰδοῖ 
καὶ τῇ πρὸς τὸ ἀνὰ μέσον ἀρετῆς καὶ κακίας 
ἀδιαφορίᾳ. φίχησον τὸ ἀνθρώπινον γένος. ἀκολ- 


1 ἡδέα (ἡδίω Rend.) Schultz. 





1 ep. ii 133; x. 30; Herodian i. 4, §2; Dio 71. 10, ὃ 4. 
2 χι. 18,84. Ἢ Epict. Frag. 129. 4 ep. Hor. Ep. i. 10, 31. 
5 iv. 8 αὦ init ; vin. 48 6 vi 173 vin. 293 ix. 7, 


170 


BOOK Vil 


compassion + not surprise or anger. For thou hast 
still thyself either the same notion of good and evil as 
he or another not unlike. Thou needs must forgive 
him then.’ But if thy notions of good and evil are 
no longer such, all the more easily shalt thou be 
gracious to him that sees awry. 

27. Dream not of that which thou hast not as 
though already thine, but of what thou hast pick 
out the choicest blessings, and do not forget in 
respect of them how eagerly thou wouldst have 
coveted them, had they not been thine.’ Albeit 
beware that thou do not inure thyself, by reason 
of this thy delight in them, to prize them so highly as 
to be distressed 1f at any time they are lost to thee.* 

28. Gather thyself into thyself? It is character- 
istic of the rational Ruling Faculty to be satisfied 
with its own righteous dealing and the peace which 
that brings. 

29. Eifface imagination'® Cease to be pulled as 
a puppet by thy passions.’ Isolate the present. 
Recognize what befalls either thee or another. 
Dissect and analyze all that comes under thy ken 
into the Causal and the Material. Meditate on thy 
last hour.6 Let the wrong thy neighbour does thee 
rest with him that did the wrong.® 

30. Do thy utmost to keep up with what is said.” 
Let thy mind enter into the things that are done 
and the things that are doing them. 

31. Make thy face to shine with simplicity and 
modesty and disregard of all that lies between virtue 
and vice. Love human-kind. Follow God. Says 


7 ii 2 ete, 8. Ἢ, Ὁ " ix. 90, 38. 10 vii. 4. 


1 1 St. Peter, ii. 17. cy Sen. de Vat. Beat. 15: Deum sequere. 
Dio Chrys n 98 R. 


177 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


A nw , e/ 7 
ούθησον θεῷ. ἐκεῖνος μέν φησιν, ὅτε “πάντα 
, 5 Δ} \ 7 . Ὁ) \ a Ph) ’ “ΩΝ 
νομιστί, Téten! δὲ wovat~ τὼ στοιχεῖα. ἀρκεῖ δὲ 
ον 7 \ oY ῃ , 
μεμνῆσθαι, ὅτι τὰ πάντα νομιστὶ ἔχει. ἤδη λίαν 
ἽΝ ἢ a 
ὀλίγα. 
XN / , 
λβ΄. Περὶ θανάτου: ἢ σκεδασμός, εἰ ἄτομοι" 
Υ̓ 4 2 7 N 
ἢ «εἰ ἕνωσις," ἤτοι σβέσις ἢ μετάστασις. 
,ὕ \ \ > , 3 7 
λγ΄. Περὶ πόνου" “τὸ μὲν ἀφόρητον ἐξάγει" τὸ 
\ / , 2) ν Ἐξ , \ Coe α ἐς 
δὲ χρονίζον, φορητόν" " καὶ ἡ διάνοια τὴν ἑαυτῆς 
v7 \ 3 4 n \ 2 A 
γαλήνην κατὰ atohn we διατηρεῖ, καὶ οὐ χεῖρον 
Ν / \ \ 7 7 
τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν γέγονεν. τὰ δὲ κακούμενα μέρη 
ΝᾺ J Ἵ fo 7 \ σι 
ὑπὸ τοῦ πόνου, εἴ τι δύναται, περὶ αὐτοῦ 
> / 
ἀποφηνάσθω. 
ἤ \ a © 
AO. Περὶ δόξης" ἴδε τὰς διανοίας αὐτῶν, οἷαι, 
\ a \ ΄ @ Dé ὃ 4 Ν 
καὶ οἷα μὲν φεύγουσαι, οἷα δὲ διώκουσαι. καὶ 
¢ ral , , ΄ 
ὅτι, ὡς αἱ θῖνες ἄλλαι ἐπ᾽ ἄλλαις ἐπιφορούμεναι, 
Ν , , fa) / \ 
κρύπτουσι τὰς προτέρας, οὕτως ἐν τῷ βίῳ τὰ 
, \ nN / 4 
πρότερα ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπενεχθέντων τάχιστα 
ἐκαλύφθη. 
, ιὃ a f 
Ne. [Π{λατωνικὸν.} Ὁ “He οὖν ὑπάρχει διανοίᾳ 
/ \ 7 Ν \ f 
μεγαλοπρέπεια καὶ θεωρία πωυτὸς μὲν χρόνου, 
/ \ 7 & ΄ / an 
πάσης δὲ οὐσίας, dpa οἴει τούτῳ μέγα τι δοκεῖν 
3, \ 3 , , I07 δ᾿ > Ψ 
εἶναι τὸν ἀνθρώπινον βίον; ἀδύνατον, ἢ δ᾽ ὅς. 
ω͵ \ f 7 ¢ 
οὐκοῦν καὶ θάνατον ov δεινόν τι ἡγήσεται ὁ 
ΜᾺ 39 
τοιοῦτος; ἥκιστά γε. 
1 ἐτεῇ Usener: ἐτὶ ei P: ἔτι 9 A. 
ὁ δαίμονα PA: δὲ μόνα Cor. : δαιμόνια Xyl. 
ὁ εἰ ἕνωσις Cas , Schenkl: ἢ PA: κένωσις P. 


 «πλατωνικὸν,» P: 50. «- Αντισθενικὸν-- ὃ 36, and «- Πλα- 
τωνικὰ: 8 44 


178 


BOOK VII 


the Sage: All thangs by Law, but in very truth 
only elements. And it suffices to remember that 
all things are by law: there thou hast it briefly 
enough ! ; 

32. Or Drarn: Hither dispersion if atoms; or, if 
a single Whole, either extinction or a change of 
state.” 

33. Or Pain: When unbearable it destroys us, when 
lasting, wt is bearable,* and the mind safeguards its 
own calm by withdrawing itself, and the ruling 
Reason takes no hurt. As to the parts that are 
impaired by the pain, let them say their say abuut it 
as they cant 

34 Or Grory: Look at the minds of its vuotaries, 
their characteristics, ambitions, antipathies." Re- 
member too that, as the sands of the sea drifting 
one upon the other bury the earlier deposits, su in 
lite the earlier things are very soon Indden uider 
what comes after. 

3 (From Plato.]' Dost thou think that the life of 
man can seen any gieal matter to him who has true 
grandeur of soul and a comprehensive outlook on all 
Lime and all Substance?“ It cannot seem so,’ said he. 
Will such a man then deem death a terrible thing ? 
ἐς Nol in the least.” 


‘The reading and meaning are uncertain, The Sage 
23 Democritus, and we should expect atoms rather than 
elements to be mentioned Leopold aptly quotes Sext Emp 
vil. 35: νόμῳ γλυκὺ καὶ νόμῳ πικμόν, vow θερμὸν "νόμῳ ψυχρόν 

. . ἐτεῇ δὲ ἄτομα καὶ κένον Fournier cleverly makes ἃ 
hexameter of the words πάντα νομίστ᾽, ετεῇ δὲ μόνα στοιχεῖα 
«-κένον TES 

2 Sen. Hp 0ὅ ad fin. : Mors cut fints nut transiius. 

3 vn. 16, 64. cp. Aesch. Fray 310: θάρσει" πόνου yop 
ἄκρον οὐκ ἫΝ χρόνον ; ; Diog. Laert. δ μιοιιις ΧΧχΧι. 4. 

* vn. 14; vii. 40 3 vi 59. ® Rep, 486 A. 

179 
Ν 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


\ \ a 
Ae [Δντισθενικόν ] “ Baoihexor μὲν εὖ 
7 a Ν + 99 
πράττειν, κακῶς δὲ ἀκούειν. 
\ , ς , 
NE. Αἰσχρόν ἐστι TO μὲν πρόσωπον ὑπήκοον 
εἶναι καὶ σχηματίζεσθαι καὶ κατακοσμεῖσθαι, ὡς 
3 \ 3 e ? € a) \ 
κελεύει ἡ διάνοια, αὐτὴν δ᾽ ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτῆς μὴ 
σχηματίζεσθαι καὶ κατακοσμεῖσθαι. 
r -“ \ > ON fa 
λη. “Τοῖς πράγμασιν yap οὐχὶ θυμοῦσθαι 
7 
εών" 
ΧΡ \ 3 A "δέ ” 
μέλει YAP αὑτοῖς οὐδεν. 
f ce ») θ 7 θ n - \ ς al , 
λθ΄. Αθανάτοις τε θεοῖς καὶ ἡμῖν χάρματα 
᾽ὔ 
δοίης." 
’ ἐς ΤῊ , cf ΄ , 
μ. Βίον θερίζειν, ὥστε κάρπιμον στάχυν, 
Ν \ 429 
καὶ τὸν μὲν εἶναι, τὸ» δὲ μή. 
μα΄. “Ἐπ δ᾽ ἡμελήθην ἐκ θεῶν καὶ παῖδ᾽ ἐμώ, 
ίω 2} 
ἔχει λόγον καὶ τοῦτο. 
, 6 IAN νὰ ῷ > 3 Ὁ ey 5» 
μβ΄. “TO γὰρ εὖ μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ καὶ τὸ δίκαιον. 
ῇ εν \ A \ , 55 
py. “Μὴ συνεπιθρηνεῖν, μὴ σφύζειν. 
,ὔ 
wo. [ΠΠλατωνικά.ἡ “᾿Εγὼ δὲ τούτῳ δίκαιον 
q / nn δὲ 
ἂν λόγον ἀντείποιμι' ὅτι οὐ καλῶς λέγεις, ὦ 
3 2 y a / ¢€ 7 ΤᾺ 
ἄνθρωπε, εἰ οἴει δεῖν κίνδυνον ὑπολογίζεσθαι τοῦ 
ΜᾺ ἢ ¢ Ν \ 
ζῆν ἢ τεθνάναι ἄνδρα, ὅτου τι καὶ σμικρὸν ὄφελος: 
a f ἴω δ 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐκεῖνο μόνον σκοπεῖν, ὅταν πράττῃ, 
πότερον δίκαια ἢ ἄδικα πράττει καὶ ἀνδρὸς 
cal N nw 
ἀγαθοῦ <épya>! ἢ κακοῦ." 
, ςς Φ \ 2 > ? ὃ ᾽ θ “Ἂ nn 
με. “Οὕτω yap ἔχει, ὦ ἄνδρες ᾿Αθηναῖοι, τῇ 
2 f e Ψ eX / rc 7 
ἀληθείᾳ: οὗ ἄν τις αὑτὸν τάξῃ ἡγησάμενος 


1 «ἔργα: from Plato, Gat: so δεῖ below 





1 ep. Epict. iv. 6, § 20; 1 St. Peter, ii. 20 See Diog. 
Laert. Antisthenes § 4. Plutarch attributes the saying to 


Alexander 2 vii. 60. 
* Kur. Bellerophon, Frag. 289; xi. 6. Twice quoted by 
Plutarch. 4 Unknown. 


180 


BOOK VII 


36. [From Antisthenes.] ’Z%s royal to do well and 
be all spoken of. } 

37. It isa shame that while the countenance 3 is 
subject to the mind, taking its cast and livery from 
it, the mind cannot take its cast and its livery from 
itself. 

38. Lt nought availeth to be wroth with things, 

For they reck not of it.3 

39. Unto the deathless Gods and to us give cause for 
rejowcing 4 

40. Our lives are reaped like the ripe ears oJ corn, 

dnd as one falls, another still is burn 

41. Phough me and both my sons the Gods have 

spurned, 
For this too there is reason ® 
£2. For justice and good luck shall bide nith me.7 
3. No chorus of loud dirges, no hysteria. 

44, [Citations from Plato]: 

1 mght fairly answer such ἃ questioner: Thou art 
mistaken if thou thinkest that a man, who is worth 
anylhing at all, ought to let considerations of hfe and 
death weigh with him rather than in all that he does 
consider but this, mhether it ts just or unjust and the 
work of a good man or a bad. 

45. Lhis, O men of Athens, is the true state of the 
case: Wherever aman has stationed himself, deeming 


5 Eur. Hypsipyle, Frag. 757; xi.6. Cie use. ii. 25, ὃ 
Vita omnibus metenda, ut fruges. Hpict. 11. 6. 14. ep. Job v. 

6 Kur. Antiope, Frag. 207; xi. 6. 

7 sc. σύμμαχον ἔσται Kur. Hray 910. Twice quoted by Cicero 
(ad Att. v1.1, 88 ; νι. 8, ξ 3). cp. Arist ich 061, 

5. Unknown. 

" Plato, Awol. Ὧ8 Ὁ. Socrates is answering a question 
whether he is not ashamed of risking his life in a vocation 
such as his. 

1S 


5g. 
26, 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


βέλτιστον εἶναι ἢ ὑπ᾽ ἄρχοντος ταχθῇ, ἐνταῦθα 
«δεῖ», ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ, μένοντα κινδυνεύειν, μηδὲν 
ὑπολογιζόμενον “μήτε θάνατον μήτε ἄλλο μηδὲν 
πρὸ τοῦ αἰσχροῦ. 

με΄. a ᾿Αλλ), @ μακάριε, ὅρα, μὴ ἄλλο τι τὸ 
γενναῖον καὶ τὸ ἀγαθὸν ἢ τὸ σώξειν τε καὶ 
σώξεσθαι": μὴ γὰρ τοῦτο μέν, τὸ ζῆν ὁποσονδὴ 
χρόνον, TOV γε ὡς ἀληθῶς ἄνδρα, ἐατέον ἐστί, καὶ 
οὐ φιλοψυχητέον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιτρέψαντα περὶ τούτων 
τῷ θεῷ καὶ πιστεύσαντα ταῖς γυναιξίν, ὃ ὅτι “τὴν 
εἱμαρμένην οὐδ᾽ ἃ ἂν εἷς ,ἐκφύγοι;, τὸ ἐπὶ τούτῳ 
σκεπτέον, τίνα ἂν τρόπον τοῦτον, ὃν μέλλει 
χρόνον βιῶναι, ὡς ἄριστα Biddy.” 

ut’. Περισκοπεῖν ἄστρων δρόμους ὥσπερ 
συμπεριθέοντα: καὶ τὰς τῶν στοιχείων εἰς 
ἄλληλα μεταβολὰς συνεχῶς ἐννοεῖν" ἀποκαθαίρ- 
ουσι γὼρ αἱ τούτων φαντασίαι τὸν ῥύπον τοῦ 
χαμαὶ βίου. 

μη. Καλὸν τὸ τοῦ Πλάτωνος. καὶ δὴ περὶ 
ἀνθρώπων τοὺς λόγους ποιούμενον ἐπισκοπεῖν 
δεῖ καὶ τὰ ἐπίγεια, ὥσπερ ποθὲν ἄνωθεν, κατὰ ἢ 
ἀγέλας, στρατεύματα, yewpyla, γάμους, δια- 
λύσεις, γενέσεις, θανάτους, δικαστηρίων θόρυβον, 
ἐρήμους χώρας, βαρβάρων ἔθνη ποικίλα, ἑορτάς, 
θρήνους, ἀγοράς, τὸ παμμιγὲς καὶ τὸ ἐκ τῶν 
ἐναντίων συγκοσμούμενον. 

μθ΄. Ta προγεγονότα ἀναθεωρεῖν, τὰς τοσ- 


1 κάτω Cas. 





1 Plato, Apol. 28 H. 2 Plato, Gorgias, 512 DE. 

3 What follows is obviously not a saying of Plato. We 
must therefore refer back to what precedes, or suppose that 
Plato’s words have dropped out. 


182 


BOOK VII 


it the best for him, or has been stationed by his 
commander, there ἀρ ὑεῖς he oughi to stay and run 
every risk, taking into account neither death nor any 
thing else save dishonour. 1 

46. But, my good sir, see whether nobility and 
goodness do not mean something other than to save and 
be saved; for surely a man worthy of the name must 
waive aside the question of .the duration of lite how- 
ever extended, and must not cling basely to life, bul 
leaving these things in the hands of God pin his faith 
to the women’s adage, ‘his destiny no man can_flee,’ 
and thereafter consider in what may he may best live 
jor such time as he has to live? 

47. Watch the stars in their courses as one that 
runneth about with them therein; and think 
constantly upon the reciprocal changes of the 
elements, for thoughts on these things cleanse away 
the mire of our earthly life. 

48. Noble is this saying of Plato’s.2 Moreover he 
who discourses of men should, as if from some 
vantagé-point * above, take a bird's-eye view of the 
things of earth, in its gatherings,® armies, husbandry, 
its marriages and separations,® its births and deaths, 
the din of the law-court and the silence of the 
desert, barbarous races manifold, its feasts and 
mournings and markets, the medley of it all and its 
orderly conjunction of contraries. 

49, Pass in review the far-off things of the past 


4 ix. 80. ep Lucian, Char. §15; Iearo-Men. § 12. 
cae bi a ἀγέλας be read, it will literally, diore ὦ) 
κατα ayeAas be reacl, 16 Will mean ΠΟΥ, wore vy 
drove, 1.6. in ws uggregautions; 1f κάτω, ἀγέλας, the latter 
word must refer to gatherings of men. 
6 This night mean treaties of peace, but there seems to be 
a system of ‘contrasted pairs. 


183 


2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


, a ¢ Ἂ λ, ὕες Ἵ Na \ 
avuTas τῶν ἡγεμονιῶν μεταβολάς. ἔξεστι καὶ 
A ς “ Ν ͵ 
τὰ ἐσόμενα προεφορᾶν. ὁμοειδῆ γὰρ πάντως 
ἔσται, καὶ οὐχ οἷόν τε ἐκβῆναι τοῦ ῥυθμοῦ τῶν 
“ \ / 
νῦν γινομένων: ὅθεν καὶ ἴσον τὸ τεσσαράκοντα 
“A Ν id 7) aA >» \ 
ἔτεσιν ἱστορῆσαι τὸν ἀνθρώπινον βίον τῷ ἐπὶ ἔτη 
4 
μύρια. τί γὰρ πλέον ὄψει; 
ἢ. “ Καὶ τὰ μὲν ἐκ γῆς 
? ’ 3 a \ + Ὁ 2 2 , 
φύντ᾽ εἰς γαῖαν, Ta δ᾽ ἀπ᾽ αἰθερίου 
“᾿ 3 , 
βλαστόντα γονῆς εἰς οὐράνιον 
ΠῚ “Ὁ 
πόλον ἦλθε πάλιν' 


ἢ τοῦτο διάλυσις τῶν ἐν ταῖς ἀτόμοις ἀντεμ.- 
πλοκῶν καὶ τοιοῦτός τις σκορπισμὸς TOV ἀπαθῶν 
στοιχείων. 
να΄. ΚΚαὶ 
““Σίτοισι καὶ ποτοῖσι καὶ μωγεύμασι 
παρεκτρέποντες ὀχετόν, ὥστε μὴ θανεῖν." 


εὐ 7ὔ 
“Θεόθεν δὲ πνέοντ᾽ οὖρον ἀνάγκη 
a 3 ”> 
τλῆναι καμάτοις ἀνοδύρτοις. 


; r 39 
vB? “Καββαλικώτερος,᾽ ἀλλ᾽ οὐχὶ κοινων- 
LK@TEPOS οὐδὲ αἰδημονέστερος οὐδ᾽ εὐτακτότερος 
ἐπὶ τοῖς συμβαίνουσιν οὐδὲ εὐμενέστερος πρὸς τὰ 
al / 
τῶν πλησίον παροράματα. 
͵ c/ δ 3 Ἂ / ἈΝ 
vy. “Ὅπου ἔργον ἐπιτελεῖσθαι δύναται κατὰ 
Ν \ Ἂ “ o 
τὸν κοινὸν θεοῖς καὶ ἀνθρώποις λόγον, ἐκεῖ οὐδὲν 
Ν 7 - “ 
δεινόν: ὅπου γὰρ ὠφελείας τυχεῖν ἔξεστι διὰ τῆς 


‘rus... μεταβολὰς seems out of place, and Juckson 
would put the words after ποικίλα, in previous section. 

2 Here P has a note, οὐκ ἔστιν ἀρχὴ τοῦτο, ἀλλ᾽ «- ἐκ» 
τῶν ἀνωτέρω τῶν πρὸ τῶν Πλατονικῶν συναφές. 


184 


BOOK VII 


and its succession of sovranties without number. 
Thou canst look forward and see the future also. 
For it will most surely be of the same character,! 
and it cannot but carry on the rhythm of existing 
things. Consequently it is all one, whether we 
witness human life for forty years or ten thousand. 
For what more shalt thou see ἢ 


50. ddl that is eurth-borr gi avitates earthwards, 
Dust unto dust ; and all that from ether 
Grows, speeds snuftly back again heavenward ; * 
thai is, either there is a breaking up of the closely- 
linked atoms or, what 1s much the same, a scattering 
ot the impassive elements. ; 
51. Again: 


With meats and drinks and curious sorceries 
Srde-track the stream, so be they may not die.’ 


IPhen a storm from the Gods beats down on our 
bark, 

dl our oars then we needs must tow and complain 
nol.* 


52. Beller at the cross-buttock,? may be, but not at 
shewing public spirit or modesty, or being readier for 
every contingency or more gracious to our neighbour 
if he sees awry. 

53. A work that can be accomplished in obedience 
to that reason which we share with the Gods is 
attended with no fear. For no harm need be 
anticipated, where by an activity that follows the 

ἔνι 37 

* Bur. Chrys, Fray 836 Constantly quoted. cp. Luer. 
it 991; Genesis πὶ. 19: γῆ εἶ καὶ és γῆν ἀπελεύσῃ ; Hccle- 
stasticus xl. 11. 

ὁ Bur Sug. 1110. * Unkuown. 

ὃ Plutarch, Apophéh. 2. 206 L. 

185 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


εὐοδούσης Kal κατὰ τὴν κατασκευὴν προιούσης 
ἐνεργείας, ἐκεῖ οὐδεμίαν βλάβην ὑφορατέον. 

νδ΄, Πανταχοῦ καὶ διηνεκῶς ἐπὶ σοί ἐστι καὶ 
τῇ παρούσῃ συμβάσει θεοσεβῶς εὐαρεστεῖν, καὶ 
τοῖς παροῦσιν ἀνθρώποις κατὰ δικαιοσύνην 
προσφέρεσθαι, καὶ τῇ παρούσῃ φαντασίᾳ ἐμφιλο- 
τεχνεῖν, ἵνα μή τι ἀκατάληπτον παρεισρυῇ. 

ve. Μὴ περιβλέπου ἀλλότρια ἡγεμονικά, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖ βλέπε κατ᾽ εὐθύ, ἐπὶ τί σε ἡ φύσις 
ὁδηγεῖ, i τε τοῦ ὅλου διὰ τῶν συμβαινόντων σοι 
καὶ ἡ σὴ διὰ τῶν πρακτέων ὑπὸ σοῦ. πρακτέον 
δὲ ἑκάσπῳ τὸ ἑξῆς τῇ κατασκευῇ" κατεσκεύασται 
δὲ τὰ μὲν λοιπὰ τῶν λογικῶν ἕνεκεν, ὥσπερ καὶ 
ἐπὶ παντὸς ἄλλου τὰ χείρω τῶν κρειττόνων 
ἕνεκεν, τὰ δὲ λογικὰ ἀλλήλων ἕνεκεν. 

Τὸ μὲν οὖν προηγούμενον ἐν τῇ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
κατασκευῇ τὸ κοινωνικὸν ἐστι' δεύτερον δὲ τὸ 
ἀνένδοτον πρὸς τὰς σωματικὰς πείσεις" λογικῆς 
γὰρ καὶ νοερᾶς κινήσεως ἴδιον περιορίζειν ἑαυτὴν 
καὶ μήποτε ἡττᾶσθαι μήτε αἰσθητικῆς μήτε ὁρμη- 
τικῆς κινήσεως" ζῳώδεις γὰρ ἑκάτεραι" ἡ δὲ νοερὰ 
ἐθέλει πρωτιστεύειν καὶ μὴ κατακρατεῖσθαι ὑπ᾽ 
ἐκείνων. δικαίως ye πέφυκε γὰρ γχρηστικὴ 
πᾶσιν ἐκείνοις. τρίτον ἐν τῇ Χογικῇ κατασκευῇ 
τὸ ἀπρόπτωτον καὶ ἀνεξαπάτητον. τούτων οὖν 
ἐχόμενον τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν εὐθεῖαν  περαινέτω, καὶ 
3 \ ¢ eo) 
ἔχει τὰ ἑαυτοῦ. 

vs’. Ὡς ἀποτεθνηκότα δεῖ, καὶ μέχρι νῦν 

1 εὐθείᾳ Schenk]: εὐθέα PA: εὐθεῖαν Cor. (ep. x. 11). 

186 


BOOK VII 


right road, and satisfies the demands of our con- 
stitution, we can ensure our own weal. 

54, At all times and in all places it rests with thee 
both to be content with thy present lot as a 
worshipper of the Gods, and to deal righteously with 
thy present neighbours, and to labour lovingly at thy 
present thoughts, that nothing unverified should 
steal into them. 

55. Look not about thee at the ruling Reason of 
sagt but look with straight eves at this, Lo what 

Nature guiding thee?—both the Nature of the 
antes by means of what befalls thee and thy 
nature by means of the acts thou hast to do. But 
everyone must do what follows from his own con- 
stitution ; and all other things have been constituted 
for the sake of rational beings—just asin every other 
case the lower are for the sake of the higher t— but 
the rational for their own sake. 

Social obligation then is the leading feature in the 
constitution of man and, coming second to it, an 
uncompronusing resistance to bodily inclinations. 
For it is the privilege of a rational and intelli- 
gent motion to isolate itself, and never to be 
overcome by the motions of sense or desire ; for 
either kind is animal-like. But the motion of the 
Intelligence claims ever to have the pre-eminence and 
never tobe mastered by them. And nightly so, for it 
is its nature to put all those to itsown use. Thirdly, 
the rational constitution is free from precipitancy 
and cannot be misled. Let the ruling Reason then, 
clinging to these characteristics, accomplish a straight 
course and then it comes into its own. 

56. As one that is dead, and his life till now lived 


1 vy. 16, 305; x1. 10. 
187 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


βεβιωκότα, τὸ λοιπὸν ἐκ τοῦ περιόντος ζῆσαι 
κατὰ τὴν φύσιν. 

νζ΄. Μόνον φιλεῖν τὸ ἑαυτῷ συμβαῖνον καὶ 
συγκλωθόμενον. τί γὰρ ἁρμοδιώτερον;, 

vn « Ed’ ἑκάστου ᾿συμβάματος ἐκείνους πρὸ 
ὀμμάτων ἔχειν, οἷς τὰ αὐτὰ συνέβαινεν, ἔπειτα 
ἤ ἤχθοντο, ἐξενίξοντο, ἐμέμφοντο' νῦν οὗν ἐκεῖνοι 
ποῦ; οὐδαμοῦ' τί οὗν; καὶ σὺ θέλεις ὁ ὁμοίως; οὐχὶ 
δὲ τὰς μὲν ἀλλοτρίας τροπὰς καταλιπεῖν τοῖς 
τρέπουσι καὶ τρεπομένοις; αὐτὸς δὲ περὶ τὸ πῶς 
χρῆσθαι αὐτοῖς ὅλος γίνεσθαι; χρήσῃ γὰρ καλῶς, 
καὶ ὕλη σου ἔσται" μόνον πρόσεχε καὶ θέλε 
σεαυτῷ καλὸς ὃ εἶναι ἐπὶ παντός, οὗ πράσσεις" 
καὶ μέμνησοΐ «ἐπ. ὃ ἀμφοτέρων, ὅτι καὶ διά- 
φορον τ ἐφ᾽ οὗ ἡ πρᾶξις. 

νθ΄. "Ἔνδον σκέπε.. ἔνδον ἡ πηγὴ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ 
καὶ ἀεὶ ἀναβλύειν δυναμένη, ἐὰν ἀεὶ σκάπτῃς" 

.ξ΄. Δεῖ καὶ τὸ σῶμα πεπηγέναι καὶ μὴ 
διερρῖφθαι μήτε ἐν κινήσει μήτε ἐν σχέσει. 

ζ 

οἷον γάρ τι ἐπὶ τοῦ προσώπου “παρέχεται ἡ 
διάνοια, συνετὸν ὅ αὐτὸ καὶ εὔσχημον συν- 
τηροῦσα," τοιοῦτο καὶ ἐπὶ ὅλου τοῦ σώματος 
ἀπαιτητέον. πάντα δὲ ταῦτα σὺν τῷ ἀνεπιτηὲ- 
εὐτῳ φυλακτέα 

ξα΄. Ἣ βιωτικὴ τῇ παλαιστικῇ ὁμοιοτέρα 
ἤπερ τῇ ὀρχηστικῇ κατὰ τὸ πρὸς τὰ ἐμπίπτοντα 
καὶ οὐ προεγνωσμένα ἜΒΗ: καὶ ἀπτὼς ἑστάναι. 

1 «οὐ» Reiske. 2 καλῶς A. 

ὁ «ἐπ᾽; Gat.: κἀδιάφορον Kron: Schultz and Schenkl 
mark a lacuna after ὅτι. 

ἐ βλέπε P: σκοπεῖ D: σκάπτε Schultz. 


ὅ συνεστὸς Cor. 
ὃ καὶ συντηροῦσα A: ἀεὶ for καὶ Schenkl. 


188 


BOOK VII 


and gone, must thou count the rest of thy days as 
so much to the good,! and live according to Nature. 

57. Love only what befalls thee and is spun for 
thee by fate. For what can be more befitting for 
thee? 

58. In every contingency keep before thine eyes 
those who, when these same things befell them, 
were straightway aggrieved, estranged,” rebellious. 
Where are they now? Now here! What then? 
Wouldst thou be like them? Why not leave those 
alien deflections to what deflects and is deflected by 
them, and devote thyself wholly to the question how 
to tarn these contingencies to the best advantage ° 
For then wilt thou make a noble use of thei, and 
they shall be thy raw material. Only in thought 
and will take heed to be beautiful to thyself in all 
that thou doest. And remember, in rejecting the 
one and using the other, that the thing which inatters 
is the aim of the action. 

59. Look within. Within is the fountain of Good,’ 
ready always to well forth if thou wilt alway delve. 

§0. The body too should be firmly set and suffer 
no distortion in movement or bearing. For what 
the mind effects in the face,* by keeping it composed 
and well-favoured, should be looked for similarly 
in the whole body. But all this must be secured 
without conscious effort. 

61. The business of life is more akin to wrestling ἡ 
than dancing, for it requires of us to stand ready 
and unshakable against every assault however 
unforeseen. 

lep Sen. Hp. 1l2ad fin Quisquis diart Visi,” quotidie 
ad lucrum suryit. 2 Or, tehken by surprise. cp. vin. 10. 

ὁ St. John iv. 14. ἐν, 87. cp. vu 24. 

5 St. Paul, Eph. vi. 12. 

189 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ξβ΄. Συνεχῶς ἐφιστάναι, τίνες εἰσὶν οὗτοι, ὑφ᾽ 
ὧν μαωρτυρεῖσθαι θέλεις. καὶ τίνα ἡγεμονικὰ 
ἔχουσιν. οὔτε γὰρ μέμψῃ τοῖς ἀκουσίως πταί- 
ουσιν, οὔτε ἐπιμαρτυρήσεως δεήσῃ, ἐμβλέπων εἰς 
Tas πηγὰς τῆς ὑπολήψεως καὶ ὁ ὁρμῆς αὐτῶν. 

Er’ “Πᾶσα Ψυχή," φησίν, “ ἄκουσα στέρεται 
ἀληθείας" οὕτως οὗν καὶ δικαιοσύνης καὶ 
σωφροσύνης καὶ εὐμενείας καὶ παντὸς τοῦ 
τοιούτου. ἀναγκαιότατον δὲ τὸ διηνεκῶς τούτου 
μεμνῆσθαι: ἔσῃ γὰρ πρὸς πάντας πρᾳότερος. 

ξδ΄. ‘Ent μὲν παντὸς πόνου πρόχειρον ἔστω, 
ὅτι οὐκ αἰσχρόν, οὐδὲ τὴν διάνοιαν τὴν κυβερν- 
ὥσαν χείρω ποιεῖ" οὔτε γὰρ καθὸ λογική | ἐστιν 
οὔτε καθὸ κοινωνικὴ διαφθείρει αὐτήν' ἐπὶ 
μέντοι τῶν πλείστων πόνων καὶ τὸ τοῦ Ἐπικού- 
pov σοι βοηθείτω, ὅτι “ οὔτε ἀφόρητον οὔτε αἰών- 
Lov, ἐὼν τῶν ὅρων μνημονεύης καὶ μὴ προσ- 
δοξάζης. κἀκείνου δὲ μέμνησο, ὅτι πολλά, πόνῳ 
τὰ αὐτὰ ὄντα, λανθάνει δυσχεραινόμενα' οἷον τὸ 
νυστάζειν καὶ τὸ καυματίξεσθαι καὶ τὸ ἀν- 
ορεκτεῖν'. ὅταν οὖν τινι τούτων δυσαρεστῇς, 
λέγε ἑαυτῷ, ὅτι πόνῳ ἐνδίδως. 

Ed, “Opa, μήποτέ «τί τοιοῦτον πάθῃς πρὸς 
τοὺς ἀπανθρώπους, οἷον οἱ «-ἀὧπξ ἄνθρωποι" πρὸς 
τοὺς ἀνθρώπους. 

ἕξ. Πόθεν ἴσμεν, εἰ μὴ Ῥηλαύγης wx par- 
ous τὴν διάθεσιν κρείσσων ἣν; ov yap ἀρκεῖ, 


1 καθὺ ὑλικὴ P Mo 2: καθολική A: καθὸ λογική Cas. 
2. «ἀπ: ἄνθρωποι Cas, 





1 vi. 59; vii. 34. 
Quoted by Epictetus (1. 63, 28 § 4) as from Plato (sce 
Plato, Soph 238 C; Rep. in. 412); ν ἢ 114; x. 303 χι, 18, 88 


190 


BOOK VII 


62. Continually reflect, who they are whose favour- 
able testiinony thou desirest.! and what them 3 ruling 
Reason; for thus wilt thou not find fault with those 
who unintenlonally offend, nor wilt thou want their 
testimony, when thou lookest into the inner springs 
of their opinions and desires. 

63. Every soul, says Plato, ws ref of ruth against its 
will? Therefore it is the same also with justice 
and temperance and lovingkindness and every hke 
quality. It is essential to ‘keep this ever in mind, 
for it will make thee gentler towards all.’ 

64. Whenever thou art in pain, have this reflection 

eady, that this is nothmy to be ashamed of. nur can 
i ae worse the mind that holds the helm — Fer it 
cannot impair it m so far as it is rational or in so far 
as it is social. In most pains, however, call to thy 
rescue even Epicurus when he says that a pain 15 
never unbearable* or interminable, so that thou. re- 
member its limitations and add nothing to it in 
imagination.” Recollect this too that many of our 
every-day discomforts are really pain in disguise, such 
as drowsiness,® a high temperature, want of appetite. 
When inclined to be vexed at any of these. say to 
thyself: 1 am giving in to pan“ 

65. See that thou never have for the inhuman 
the feeling which the inhuman have for human 
kind. 

66. How do we know that Telauges 5 may not have 
excelled Socrates in character? For it is not enough 

ὁ The saine word is used of Marcus by Galen (xi 17 
Kula); Athenag. Apo? 1.1; Lucan, Pereyr, 173 and 
Aristides, ad Rey 88 105, 112. 

+ vu. 33 “ νηὶ, £9. 

AD Ὁ ro να 30 

δ Son of Pythagoras. See Diog Laent Pyth 22 26 


igi 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


εἰ Σωκράτης ἐνδοξότερον ἀπέθανε, καὶ ἐντρεχέσ- 
τερον τοῖς σοφισταῖς διελέγετο, καὶ -καρτερικώ- 
τερον ἐν τῷ πάγῳ διενυκτέρευεν, καὶ τὸν Σαλαμίν- 
ιον κελευσθεὶς ἄγειν γεννικώτερον ἔδοξεν 
ἀντιβῆναι, καὶ “ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖς ἐβρενθύετο"" περὶ 
οὗ καὶ μάλιστ᾽ ἄν τις ἐπιστήσειεν,, εἴπερ ἀληθὲς 
ἣν: ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνο δεῖ σκοπεῖν, ποίαν τινὰ τὴν 
ψυχὴν εἶχε Σωκράτης, καὶ εἰ ἐδύνατο ἀρκεῖσθαι 
τῷ δίκαιος εἶναι τὰ πρὸς ἀνθρώπους καὶ ὅσιος 
τὰ πρὸς θεοὺς μήτε ἐκεῖ" πρὸς τὴν κακίαν 
ἀγανακτῶν pede μὴν δουλεύων τινὸς ἀγνοίᾳ μήτε 
τῶν ἀπονεμομένων ἐκ τοῦ ὅλου ὡς ξένον τι 
δεχόμενος ἢ ὡς ἀφόρητον ὑπομένων μήτε τοῖς 
τοῦ σαρκιδίου πάθεσιν ἐμπταρέχων συμπαθῆ τὸν 

Ν 
νοῦν. 

Eo’. Ἢ φύσις οὐχ οὕτως συνεκέρασε τῷ 
συγκρίματι, ὡς μὴ ἐφεῖσθαι περιορίξειν ἑαυτὸν 
καὶ τὰ ἑαυτοῦ ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτῷ ποιεῖσθαι: λίαν γὰρ 
ἐνδέχεται θεῖον ἄνδρα γενέσθαι καὶ ὑπὸ μηδενὸς 
γνωρισθῆναι. τούτου μέμνησο ἀεί, καὶ ἔτι 
ἐκείνου, ὅτε ἐν ὀλιγίστοις κεῖται τὸ εὐδαιμόνως 
βιῶσαι: καὶ μή, OTL ἀπήλπισας διαλεκτικὸς καὶ 
φυσικὸς ἔσεσθαι, διὰ τοῦτο ἀπογνῷς καὶ ἐλεύ- 
θερος καὶ αἰδήμων καὶ κοινωνικὸς καὶ εὐπειθὴς 
θεῷ. 

ξη. ᾿Αβιάστως διαξζῆσαι ἐ ἐν πλείστῃ θυμηδίᾳ, 
κἂν πάντες καταβοῶσιν ἅτινα βούλονται, Kav 


2 


1 ἀπιστήσειεν Gat. : dubitari potest Xyl. 
* εἰκὴ P: ἐκείνων Schenkl. 





, Plato, A pol. 20 C; Epict. iv 7 8 90. 
2 Or γενναιότερον, more honourable. 


102 


BOOK VII 


that Socrates died a more glorious death, and disputed 
more deftly with the Sophusts. and with more hardi- 
hood braved whole mghts in the frost, and, when 
called upon to fetch “the Salaminian, deemed it 
more spirited? to disobey, and that he carried his 
head high as he walked*—and about the truth of 
this one can easily judge—; but the point to 
elucidate is this: what sort of soul had Socrates,* and 
could he rest satisfied with being just in his dealings 
with men and religious in his attitude towards the 
Gods, neither resentful at the wickedness of others nor 
yet lackeying the ignorance of anyone, nor regarding 
as alien to himself anything allotted to him irom the 
Whole, nor bearing it as a burden intolerable, nor 
letting his intelligence be swayed sympathetically by 
the affections of the flesh ? 

67. Nature did not make so intim:ute a blend in 
the compound as not to allow a man to isolate 
himself and keep his own things m his own power. 
For it is very possible to be a godlike man and yet 
not to be recognized by any. Never forget this; 
nor that the happy life depends on the fewest 
possible things®; nor because thou hast been baulked 
in the hope of becoming skilled in dialectics and 
physics,’ needest thou despair of being free and 
modest and unselfish and obedient to God. 

68. Thou mayest live out thy life with none to 
constrain thee in the utmost peace of mind even 
though the whole world cry out against thee what 

ὁ Arist. Nub. 363; Plato, Symp. 221 B. The meaning of 
the parenthesis is not clear 4 em. Dio Orat. μὲ. acd ent, 

δ Sen (Hp. 79) mstances Democritus, Socrates, and Cato 

υ Juhan, Convzv. 427.21, where Marcus, asked in » hat con- 


sists the imitation of ii Gods, says δεῖσθαι τῶν ἐλαχίστων Cp. 


Lucian, Cynic 12: οἱ δ᾽ ἔγγιστοι θεοῖς ἐλαχίστων δέονται. 
Diog. Laert δοῦν, 11. Τὰ 7, 833 Cpr, δ: vis 1, 


193 





0 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τὰ θηρία διασπᾷ τὰ μελύδρια τοῦ περιτεθραμ- 
μένου τούτου φυράματος. τί γὰρ κωλύει ἐν 
πᾶσι τούτοις τὴν διάνοιαν cate ἑαυτὴν ἐν 
γαλήνῃ, καὶ κρίσει [τῇ] περὶ τῶν περιεστηκότων 
ἀληθεῖ, καὶ χρήσει τῶν ὑποβεβλημένων ἑτοίμῃ; 
ὥστε τὴν μὲν κρίσιν λέγειν τῷ “προσπίπτοντι: 
“Todro ὑπάρχεις κατ᾽ οὐσίαν, κἂν κατὰ δόξαν 
ἀλλοῖον φαίνῃ," τὴν δὲ χρῆσιν λέγειν. τῷ ὑποπίπτ- 
οντι" “Σὲ ἐζήτουν." ἀεὶ γάρ μοι τὸ παρὸν ὕλη 
ἀρετῆς 2 λογικῆς καὶ πολιτικῆς καὶ τὸ σύνολον 
τέχνης ἀνθρώπου ἢ θεοῦ. πᾶν γὰρ τὸ συμ- 
βαῖνον θεῷ ἢ ἀνθρώπῳ ἐξοικειοῦται καὶ οὔτε 
καινὸν οὔτε δυσμεταχείριστον, GAG γνώριμον 
καὶ εὐεργές. 

ξθ΄. Τοῦτο ἔχει ἡ τελειότης τοῦ ἤθους, τὸ 
πᾶσαν ἡμέραν ὡς τελευταίαν διεξάγειν καὶ μήτε 
σφύζειν μήτε ναρκᾶν μήτε ὑποκρίνεσθαι. 

ο΄. Οἱ θεοί, ἀθάνατοι ὄντες, οὐ δυσχεραίν- 
ουσιν, ὅτι ἐν τοσούτῳ αἰῶνι δεήσει αὐτοὺς 
πάντως ἀεὶ τοιούτων ὄντων καὶ τοσούτων φαύλων 
ἀνέχεσθαι: προσέτι δὲ καὶ κήδονται αὐτῶν 
παντοίως. σὺ δὲ ὅσον οὐδέπω λήγειν μέλλων 
ἀπαυδᾷς, καὶ ταῦτα, εἷς ὧν τῶν φαύλων; 

οα΄. ᾿ελοῖόν ἐστι τὴν μὲν ἰδίαν κακίαν μὴ 
φεύγειν, ὃ καὶ δυνατόν ἐστι" τὴν δὲ τῶν ἄλλων 
φεύγειν, ὅπερ ἀδύνατον. 

οβ΄. Ὃ av ἡ λογικὴ καὶ πολιτικῇ δύναμις 
εὑρίσκῃ μήτε νοερὸν μήτε κοινωνικόν, εὐλόγως 
καταδεέστερον ἑαυτῆς κρίνει. 


1 xi. 8. Applies accurately to the Christians. cp. i. 6; 
11}. 16; viii. 48, 51, ὃ 2. 2 iv. 1. 


194 


BOOK VII 


they will, even though beasts tear limb from limb this 
plastie clay that has encased thee with its growth.! 
For what in all this debars the mind from keeping 
itself in calmness, ma right judgment as to its en- 
vironment, and in readimess to use all that is put at 
its disposal? so that the judgment can say to that 
which meets it: dn essential substance thou art this, 
whatever else the common fame would have thee be. Aud 
the use can say to the object presented to it: Thee 
was seeking. For the thing in hand is for me ever 
material for the exercise of rational and civic virtue,” 
and in a word for the art of aman or of God. For 
everything that befails is intimately connected with 
God or man, and 15 not new or difficult to deal with, 
but familiar and feasible. 

69. This is the mark of a perfect character, to pass 
through each day as if it were the last,’ without 
agitation, without torpor, without pretence. 

70. The Gods—and they are immortal—do not 
take it amiss that for a time so long they must 
inevitably and always put up with worthless men 
who are what they are and so many?; nay they 
even befriend them in all manner of ways. But 
thou, though destined to die so soon, criest off, and 
that too though thou art one of the worthless ones 
thyself. 

71. It is absurd not to eschew our own wickedness, 
which is possible, but to eschew that of others, which 
is not possible.° 

72. Whatever thy rational and civic faculty dis- 
covers to be neither intelligent nor social, it judges 
with good reason to fall short of its own standard. 


3 ii. 5 + δύ, Matt v. 45. 


195 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


7 


3 3 f δ᾿ 
oy. Ὅταν σὺ εὖ πεποιηκὼς ἧς καὶ ἄλλος εὖ 
Tal 7 fal 
πεπονθώς, τί ἐπιζητεῖς τρίτον παρὰ ταῦτα, 
δ ᾿ Φ f 
ὥσπερ of pwpol, TO καὶ δόξαι εὖ πεποιηκέναι ἢ 
τὸ ἀμοιβῆς τυχεῖν; 
, / 

0d. Οὐδεὶς κάμνει ὠφελούμενος. ὠφέλεια δὲ 

fa \ ΄, \ 3 / 2 4 
πρᾶξις κατὰ φύσιν: μὴ οὖν κάμνε ὠφελούμενος, 
2 e 3 fal 
ἐν @ ὠφελεῖς. 

ree fa) v4 7 Fic N \ 7ὔ 
oe. Ἢ τοῦ ὅλου φύσις ἐπὶ τὴν κοσμοποιίαν 
a) ΜᾺ \ 
ὥρμησε' νῦν δὲ ἤτοι πᾶν τὸ γινόμενον κατ᾽ 
5 7 ? x > , \ \ 
ἐπακολούθησιν γίνεται, ἢ ἀλόγιστα καὶ τὰ 
9 \ “A e 

κυριώτατά ἐστιν, ἐφ᾽ ἂ ποιεῖται ἰδίαν ὁρμὴν τὸ 

“ / / 
τοῦ κόσμου ἡγεμονικόν. εἰς πολλά σε γαληνό- 
τερον ποιήσει τοῦτο μνημονευόμενον. 


BOOK VII 


73. When thou hast done well to another and 
another has fared well at thy hands, why go on like 
the foolish to look for a third thing besides, that 15, 
the credit also of having done well or a return for 
the same! ¢ 

74. No one wearies of benefits received: and to 
act by the law of Nature is rts own benefit. Weary 
not then of being benefited therein, wherein thou 
dost benefit others.- 

75. The Nature of the Whole felt impelled to the 
creation of a Universe; but now either all that comes 
into being does so by a natural sequence,’ or even 
the most paramount things, towards which the ruling 
Reason of the Universe feels an impulse of its own, 
are devoid of intelligence. Recollect this ἢ and thou 
wilt face many an ill with more serenity. 

ly. 6; 1x 42. ep Fronto, de Nep. ced tn 

2 eo St. Paul, Gal. vi. 9; 2 Thess 11 13. For the Stor 
view see Stob. Jicd. uu. 188. 

Save dds; ix 28 

4+ Marcus means that we must consider the second 
altcrative given above as incredible 


197 


ΒΙΒΛΙΟΝ H 


4 \ ἴω Ν Ν 9 , / ο) 3 
α΄. Καὶ τοῦτο πρὸς τὸ ἀκενόδοξον φέρει, ὅτι οὐκ 
v ΄ \ ,ὔ Ὡ A “ 3 \ f 
ἔτι δύνασαι τὸν βίον ὅλον ἢ τόν γε ἀπὸ νεότητος 
f A 
φιλόσοφον βεβιωκέναι: ἀλλὰ πολλοῖς τε ἄλλοις 
\ 3 Ν A A Ζ Υ͂ 
καὶ αὐτὸς σεαυτῷ δῆλος γέγονας πόρρω φιλο- 
“ 5} 7 Ω ee Ν \ t Se 
σοφίας ὦν. πέφυρσαι ody: ὥστε τὴν μὲν δόξαν 
\ a f / > δ 
τὴν τοῦ φιλοσόφου κτήσασθαι οὐκ ETL σοι 
ef 3 / \ \ ς ς f ” 
ῥάδιον' ἀνταγωνίζεται δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπόθεσις. εἴπερ 
Cy 3 a) “A a \ “ 
οὖν ἀληθῶς ἑώρακας, ποῦ κεῖται τὸ πρᾶγμα, 
Ν 7 / 7 ld 9 7 / 3 * 
τὸ μέν, τί δόξεις, ἄφες, ἀρκέσθητι δέ, εἰ κἂν 
ἴω 7 Ἁ 
τὸ λοιπὸν τοῦ βίου ὅσον δήποτε, <@s> 1 ἡ σὴ 
7 / ͵ f 4 / “ 
φύσις θέλει, βιώσῃ. κατανόησον οὗν, τί θέλει, 
/ 
καὶ μηδὲν ἄλλο σε περισπάτω" πεπείρασαι γάρ, 
f faa! “Ὁ Ω tal 
περὶ πόσα πλανηθείς, οὐδαμοῦ εὗρες TO εὖ ζῆν' 
9 3 la 3 9 / 3 3 “ 
οὐκ ἐν συλλογισμοῖς, οὐκ ἐν πλούτῳ, οὐκ ἐν δόξῃ, 
οὐκ ἐν ἀπολαύσει, οὐδαμοῦ. ποῦ οὖν ἐστιν; ἐν 
ΜᾺ a ἃ a ἴω , 7 al 
τῷ ποιεῖν ἃ ἐπιζητεῖ ἡ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου φύσις" πῶς 
ic A / 3 Ὁ 
οὗν ταῦτα ποιήσει; ἐὰν δόγματα ἔχῃ, ἀφ᾿ ὧν 
¢ a / Ν 
αἱ ορμαὶ καὶ αἱ πράξεις. τίνα δόγματα; τὰ 
? lal an \ ων 
περὶ ἀγαθῶν καὶ κακῶν, ὡς οὐδενὸς μὲν ἀγαθοῦ 
3 ἃ nn f 
ὄντος ἀνθρώπῳ, ὃ οὐχὶ ποιεῖ δίκαιον, σώφρονα, 
1 «ὡς» Gat, 


198 


BOOK Vill 


1, Tuis too serves as a corrective to vain-glorious- 
ness, that thou art no longer able to have lived thy 
life wholly, or even from ‘thy youth up, as a philo- 
sopher. Thou canst clearly perceive, and many others 
can see rt too, that thou art far from Philosophy. 
So then thy life is a chaos,! and no longer is it easy 
for thee to win thé credit of bemg a philosopher ; 
and the facts of thy life tuo war against it. If then 
thine eyes have venly seen where the truth lies, 
care no more what men shall think of thee, but be 
content if the rest of thy life, whether long or short, 
be lived as thy nature wills. Make sure then what 
that will is, and let nothing else draw thee aside. For 
past experience tells thee in how much thou hast gone 
astray, hor anyw here lighted upon the true life; no, 
not in the subtleties of logic,? or m1 wealth or fame 
or enjoyment, or anywhere. Where then is it to be 
found? In doing that which is the quest of man’s 
nature. How then shall a man do this? By having 
axioms as the source of his impulses and actions. 
What axioms? On the nature of Good and Evil, 
shewing that nothing 1s for a man’s good save what 
makes him just, temperate, manly, free; nor any 

1 Ov, thou hast been bexsmirched, but cp. vi. 16, ὃ 3. 
24,17 ad jin. 3 vir. 67. 


10. 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ρει ‘ \ a A \ 

ἀνδρεῖον, ἐλεύθερον, οὐδενὸς δὲ κακοῦ, ὃ οὐχὶ 
"Ἢ ,ὔ nn ᾽ / 

“ποιεῖ τἀναντία τοῖς εἰρημένοις. 

β. Καθ᾿ ἑκάστην πρᾶξιν ἐρώτα σεαυτόν' 
lat e 7 Ἂν 
“Πῶς μοι αὕτη ἔχει; μὴ μετανοήσω ἐπ᾽ αὐτῇ; " 

/ \ f ? “ 4 
μικρὸν καὶ τέθνηκα καὶ πάντ᾽ ἐκ μέσου. τί πλέον 
a“ \ Ν / / A 
ἐπιζητῶ, εἰ TO παρὸν ἔργον ξῴου voepod καὶ 
a / fa) 
κοινωνικοῦ καὶ ἰσονόμου θεῷ; 
\ \ 7 \ 
γ΄. ᾿Αλέξανδρος [δὲ] καὶ Pasos καὶ ἸΠομπήιος, 
t \ 7 \¢ ’ \ , 
τί πρὸς Διογένη καὶ Ἐἰράκλειτον καὶ Σωκράτην; 
Ν 3 \ / \ \ 
οἱ μὲν γὰρ εἶδον τὰ πράγματα καὶ τὰς aitias Kal 
\ Ν ξ \ ΩΣ 2 ἴω 
τὰς ὕλας, καὶ τὰ ἡγεμονικὰ ἣν αὐτῶν αὐτά +! 
nA δ ’, / / 
ἐκεῖ δὲ ὅσων πρόνοια καὶ δουλεία πόσων. 
δ΄ “ 2 \ κὰ \ 2 \ / δὴ 
. Ὅτι οὐδὲν ἧττον τὰ αὐτὰ ποιήσουσι, Kav 
\ a 
aN διαρραγῇς. \ ’ , \ \ 
ε΄. To πρῶτον μὴ ταράσσου" πώντα yap κατὰ 
\ “~ 4 7 \ 3 ,ὔ Ε \ 
τὴν τοῦ ὅλου φύσιν: καὶ ὀλίγου χρόνου οὐδεὶς 
3 na 4 "δὲ τ, ὃ , 5.0 Ν "} 
οὐδαμοῦ gon ὥσπερ οὐδὲ ᾿“Αδριανός, οὐδὲ Α ὔγ- 
if Ν nn 
ουστος. ἔπειτα ἀτενίσας εἰς TO πρᾶγμα ἴδε αὐτὸ 
7 δ f 7 
καὶ συμμνημονεύσας, ὅτε ἀγαθὸν σε ἄνθρωπον 
> a \ , ἴω , ὔ cal 
εἶναι δεῖ, καὶ TL τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ἡ φύσις ἀπαιτεῖ, 
Ἂ “A 2 \ \ 3 / τ 
πρᾶξον τοῦτο ἀμεταστρεπτὶ καὶ εἶπέ, ὡς 
δικαιότατον φαίνεταί σοι, μόνον εὐμενῶς καὶ 
3 4 \ 4 
αἰδημόνως καὶ ἀνυποκρίτως. 
/ e “ v4 “ / 
ς΄. “H τῶν ὅλων φύσις τοῦτο ἔργον ἔχει, τὰ 
Ὄ bu > ca 7 “ ” 
ὧδε ὄντα ἐκεῖ μετατιθέναι, μεταβάλλειν, αἴρειν 
, ω 7) 7 
ἔνθεν καὶ ἐκεῖ φέρειν. πάντα τροπαΐ, οὐχ ὥστε 


1 αὐτὰ A: ταὐτά P: ταῦτα Cas.: αὐτάρκη Schenk. 


1 Justin (Apol. i. 46) mentions Heraclitus and Socrates 
and others like them as ‘‘ living with the divine Logos.” And 


200 


BOOK VIII 


thing for his ill that makes him not the reverse of 
these. 

4. In every action ask thyself, How does it affect 
me? Shall I regret it? Buta little and I am dead 
and all that lies between 15 past. What more do I ask 
for, as long as my present work is that of a living 
creature, intelligent, social, and under one law with 
God ? 

3. What are Alexander and Gaius and Pompeius to 
Diogenes and Heraclitus! and Socrates? For these 
latter had their eyes opened to things and to 
the causes and the material substance of things. 
and their rulmg Reason was their very own. But 
those—what a host of cares, what a world of 
slavery ! 

4. Thou mayst burst thyself with rage, but they 
will go on doing the same things none the less. 

5. Firstly, fret not thyself, for all things are as the 
Nature of the Universe would have them, and within 
a little thou shalt be non-existent, and nowhere, like 
Hadrianus aud Augustus. Secondly, look stead- 
fasily at the thing, and see it as it is and, remem- 
bering withal that thou must be a good man, and 
what the Nature of man calls for, do this without 
swerving, and speak as seemeth to thee most just, 
only be it graciously, modestly, and without 
feigning.? 

6. The Nature of the Universe 1s charged with 
this task, to transfer yonder the things which are 
here, to interchange them, to take them hence and 
convey them thither. All things are but phases of 


in .lpel n. 8 Heraclitus and Musonius are spoken of as hated 


and slain for their opinions. 
2 The word here used by Marcus occurs only in Christian 


wrilings. 
201 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


φοβηθῆναι, μή τί καινόν" πάντα συνήθη: ἀλλὰ 
καὶ ἴσαι αἱ ἀπονεμήσεις. 

ξ. ᾿Αρκεῖται πᾶσα φύσις ἑαυτῇ εὐοδούσῃ' 
φύσις δὲ λογικὴ εὐοδεῖ ἐν μὲν φαντασίαις "μήτε 
ψευδεῖ μήτε ἀδήλῳ συγκατατιθεμένη, τὰς ὁρμὰς 
δὲ ἐπὶ τὰ κοινωνικὰ ἔργα μόνα ἀπευθύνουσα, τὰς 
ὀρέξεις δὲ καὶ τὰς ἐκκλίσεις τῶν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν μόνων 
πεποιημένη, τὸ δὲ ὑπὸ τῆς κοινῆς φύσεως ἀπο- 
νεμόμενον πᾶν ἀσπαζομένη. μέρος γὰρ αὐτῆς 
ἐστιν, ὡς ἡ τοῦ φύλλου φύσις τῆς τοῦ φυτοῦ 
φύσεως: πλὴν ὅτι ἐκεῖ μὲν ἡ τοῦ φύλλου φύσις 
μέρος ἐστὶ φύσεως καὶ ἀναισθήτου καὶ ἀλόγου 
καὶ ἐμποδίξεσθαι δυναμένης, ἡ δὲ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
φύσις μέρος ἐστὶν ἀνεμποδίστου φύσεως καὶ 
νοερᾶς καὶ δικαίας, εἴγε ἴσους καὶ κατ᾽ ἀξίαν τοὺς 
μερισμοὺς χρόνων, οὐσίας, αἰτίου, ἐνεργείας, συμ- 

ATEWS, ἑκάστοις ποιεῖται. σκόπει δέ, μὴ εἰ τὸ 
«ἕν; πρὸς τὸ ἕν ἴσον εὑρήσεις ἐπὶ παντός, ἀλλὰ 
εἰ συλλήβδην τὰ πάντα τοῦδε πρὸς ἀθρόα τὰ τοῦ 
ἑτέρου. 
7. “᾿᾿Αναγινώσκειν οὐκ ἔξεστιν." ἀλλὰ ὕβριν 
ἀνείργειν. ἔξεστιν. ἀλλὰ ἡδονῶν καὶ πόνων καθ- 
ὑυπερτερεῖν ἔξεστιν' ἀλλὰ τοῦ δοξαρίου ὑπεράνω 
εἶναι ἔξεστιν" ἀλλὰ “ἀναισθήτοις καὶ ἀχαρίστοις 
μὴ θυμοῦσθαι, προσέτι κήδεσθαι αὐτῶν ἔξεστιν. 

θ΄. Μηκέτι cov μηδεὶς ἀκούσῃ καταμεμφο- 
μένου τὸν ἐν αὐλῇ βίον, μηδὲ σὺ σεαυτοῦ. 

v Ἡ μετάνοια ἐστιν ἐπίληψίς τις ἑαυτοῦ, ὡς 
χρήσιμόν τι παρεικότος" τὸ δὲ ἀγαθὸν χρήσιμόν 
τι δεῖ εἶναι, καὶ ἐπιμελητέον αὐτοῦ τῷ καλῷ καὶ 





1 in 14; ἵν, 39 ; vii. 1 ete. 
202 


BOOK VIii 


change, but nothing new-fangled need be feared ; all 
things are of the wonted type,! nay, their dist butions 
also are alike. 

7. Every nature is content with itself when it 
speeds well on its way; and a rational nature speeds 
well on its way, when in its impressions it gives 
assent to nothing that is false or obscure, and directs 
its impulses towards none but social acts, and limits its 
inclinations and its aversions only to things that are 
in its power, and welcomes all that the Universal 
Nature allots it. For it is a part of that, as the 
nature of the leaf τς of the plant-nature: with the 
difference however, that in the case of the plant 
the nature of the leaf is part of a nature void both 
of sentience and reason, and liable to be thwarted, 
while a man’s nature is part of a nature unthwart- 
able and intelligent and just, if indeed it divides up 
equally and in due measure to every one his quotas 
of time, substance, cause, activity, circumstance. 
And consider, not whether thou shalt find one thing 
in every case equal to one thing, but whether, collect- 
ively, the whole of this equal to the aggregate of that. 

8. Lhou canst not be a student. But thou canst 
refrain from insolence; but thou canst rise superior 
to pleasures and pains; but thou carist tread under 
thy feet the love of glory ; but thou canst forbear to 
be angry with the unfeeling and the thankless,? aye 
and even care for them. 

9. Let no one hear thee any more grumbling at 
life in a Court,’ nay let not thine own ears hear thee. 

10. Repentance is a sort of self-reproach at some 
useful thing passed by; but the good must needs be 
a useful thing, and ever to be cultivated by the true 


2 St. Luke vi. 35. ὄν, 16. 
202 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἀγαθῷ ἀνδρί: οὐδεὶς δ᾽ ἂν καλὸς καὶ ἀγαθὸς ἀνὴρ 
μετανοήσειεν. ἐπὶ τῷ ἡδονήν τινα παρεικέναι' 
οὔτε ἄρα χρήσιμον. οὔτε ἀγαθὸν ἡδονή. 

ια΄. Τοῦτο τί ἐστιν αὐτο καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ τῇ ἰδίᾳ 
κατασκευῇ; τί μὲν τὸ οὐσιῶδες αὐτοῦ καὶ ὑλικόν; 
τί δὲ τὸ αἰτιῶδες; τί δὲ ποιεῖ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ; πόσον 
δὲ χρόνον ὑφίσταται; 

ι΄. Ὅταν ἐξ ὕπνου δυσχερῶς ἐγείρῃ, ἀνα- 
μιμνήσκου, ὅτι κατὰ τὴν κατασκευήν σου ἐστὶ 
καὶ κατὰ τὴν ἀνθρωπικὴν φύσιν τὸ πράξεις 
κοινωνικὰς ἀποδιδόναι, τὸ δὲ καθεύδειν κοινὸν καὶ 
τῶν ἀλόγων ζῴων: ὃ δὲ κατὰ φύσιν ἑκάστῳ, 
τοῦτο οἰκειότερον καὶ προσφυέστερον καὶ δὴ καὶ 
προσηνέστερον. 

uy’, Διηνεκῶς καὶ ἐπὶ πάσης, εἰ οἷόν τε, φαν- 
τασίας φυσιολογεῖν, παθολογεῖν, διαλεκτικεύ- 
εσθαι. 
Lo. ‘Ou ἂν ἐντυγχάνῃς, εὐθὺς σαυτῷ πρόλεγε' 
οὗτος τίνα δόγματα é ἔχει περὶ ἀγαθῶν καὶ κακῶν; 
εἰ γὰρ περὶ ἡδονῆς καὶ πόνου καὶ τῶν ποιητικῶν 
ἑκατέρου καὶ περὶ δόξης, ἀδοξίας, θανάτου, ζωῆς 
τοιάδε τινὰ δόγματα ἔχει, οὐδὲν θαυμαστὸν ἢ 
ξένον μοι δόξει, ἐὰν τάδε τινὰ ποιῇ" καὶ μεμνή- 
σομαι, ὅτι ἀναγκάζεται οὕτως ποιεῖν. 

ue. Μέμνησο, ὅτι, ὥσπερ αἰσχρόν ἐστι ξενίξζ- 
εσθαι, εἰ ἡ συκῆ σῦκα φέρει, οὕτως, εἰ 0 κόσμος 
τάδε τινὰ φέρει, ὧν ἐστι popes: καὶ ἰατρῷ δὲ 
καὶ κυβερνήτῃ αἰσχρὸν ξενίξεσθαι, εἰ πεπύρεχεν 
οὗτος ἢ εἰ ἀντίπνοια γέγονεν. 


meena onan 


Ω 


' Or, 7ογηιαΐευα. κι ,}. > Or, axioms 
τ. Ss iio TLS ie ey 8 a: 5 1 St. Peter, iv. 12. 


204 


BOOK VIIl 


good man; but the true good man would never regret 
having passed a pleasure by. Pleasure therefore 
is neither a useful thing nor a good. 

11. What of itself is the thing in question as 
individually constituted > What is the substance and 
material of it? What the causal! part? What 
doeth it in the Universe* How long doth it 
subsist ? 

12. When thou art loth to get up,? call to mind 
that the due discharge of social duties is in aecord- 
ance with thy constitution and in accordance with 
man’s nature, while even irrational animals share 
with us the faculty of sleep: but what is m accord- 
ance with the nature of the individual 1s more con- 
genial, more closely akin to him, aye and more 
attractive. 

13. Persistently and, if possible, in every case 
test thy impressions by the rules of physics, ethics, 
logic. 

14. Whatever man thou meetest, put to thyself 
at once this question: [hat are this man’s convictions? 
about good and evil? For if they are such and such 
about pleasure and pain and what is productive of 
them, about good report and ill report, about death 
and life, it will be in no way strange or surprising 
to me if he does such and such things. So I will 
remember that he is constrained to act as he 
does.* 

15. Remember that, as it is monstrous to be sur- 
prised at a fig-tree bearing figs, so also is it to be 
surprised at the Universe bearing its own particular 
crop. Likewise it is monstrous for a physician or a 
steersman to be surprised ® that a patient has fever 
or that a contrary wind has sprung up. 


205 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


i’. Μέμνησο, ὅτι καὶ τὸ μετατίθεσθαι καὶ 
ἕπεσθαι τῷ διορθοῦντι ὁμοίως ἐλεύθερόν ἐστιν. 
σὴ γὰρ ἐνέργεια κατὰ τὴν σὴν ὁρμὴν καὶ κρίσιν 
καὶ δὴ καὶ κατὰ νοῦν τὸν σὸν περαινομένη. 

be. Ei μὲν ἐπὶ σοί, τί αὐτὸ ποιεῖς; εἰ δὲ ἐπ᾽ 
ἄλλῳ, tive μέμφη; ταῖς ἀτόμοις ὴ τοῖς θεοῖς; 
ἀμφότερα μανιώδη. οὐδενὶ μεμπτέον. εἰ μὲν γὰρ 
δύνασαι, διόρθωσον" εἰ δὲ τοῦτο μὴ δύνασαι, τὸ 
γε πρᾶγμα αὐτό' εἰ δὲ μηδὲ τοῦτο, πρὸς τί ἔτι 
σοι φέρει τὸ μέμψασθαι; εἰκῇ γὰρ οὐδὲν ποιη- 
τέον. 

ty’. “KEw τοῦ κόσμου τὸ ἀποθανὸν οὐ πίπτει. 
εἰ ὧδε μένει, καὶ μεταβάλλει ὧδε καὶ διαλύεται 
εἰς τὰ ἴδια, ἃ στοιχεῖα ἐστι τοῦ κόσμον καὶ σά. 
καὶ αὐτὰ δὲ μεταβάλλει καὶ οὐ γογγύζει. 

ιθ΄. “Exaorov πρός Th γέγονεν, ἵππος, ἄμπελος" 
τί θαυμάζξεις; καὶ ὁ “Ἥλιος ἐρεῖ, ns πρός τί ἔργον 
γέγονα, καὶ οἱ λοιποὺ θεοί. σὺ οὗν πρὸς τί; τὸ 
ἥδεσθαι; ἴδε, εἰ ἀνέχεται ἡ ἔννοια. 

κ΄. Ἢ φύσις ἐστόχασται ἑκάστου οὐδέν τι 
ἔλασσον τῆς ἀπολήξεως ἢ τῆς ἀρχῆς τε καὶ 
διεξαγωγῆς, ὡς ὁ ἀναβάλλων τὴν σφαΐραν' τί 
οὖν ἢ ἀγαθὸν τῷ σφαιρίῳ ἀναφερομένῳ ἢ κακὸν 
καταφερομένῳ ἢ καὶ πεπτωκότι; τί δὲ ἀγαθὸν 
τῇ πομφόλυγι. συνεστώσῃ ἢ κακὸν διαλυθείσῃ; 
τὰ ὅμοια δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ λύχνου. 





en, vi. 80; vii. 7 cp. Capit. xxii. 4: ‘‘Aequius est 
ut ego tot talium amicorum consilum sequar, quart ut tot 
coe ine meam unius voluntatem sequantur”; Digest. 
7. 14,1 

2 Annus Verus, grandfather of Marcus, was the best 
ball-player of his day, see Wilmanns Inscr. 574. Marcus 
himself was an adept at the ball-game, Capit. iv. 9. 





206 


BOOK VII 


16. Remember that neither a change of mind 
nor a Willingness to be set right by others! is 
inconsistent. with true freedom of will. For thine 
alone is the active effort that effects its purpose in 
accordance with thy impulse and judgment, ave 
and thy intelligence also. 

17. If the choice rests with thee, why do the 
thing? if with another, whom dost thou blame? 
Atoms or Gods? To do either would be crazy folly. 
Noone isto blame. For if thou canst, set the offender 
right. Failing that, at least set the thing itself 
right. If that too be impracticable, what purpose 
is served by imputmg blame~ For without a 
purpose nothing should Le done. 

18. That which dies is not cast out of the Universe. 
As it remains here, 1t also suffers change here and is 
dissolved into its own constituents, which are the 
elements of the Universe and thy own. Yes, and 
they too suffer change and murmur not. 

19. Every thing, be it a horse, be it a vine, has 
come into being for some end. Why wonder? 
Helios himself will say: J exrest to do some work; 
and so of all the other Gods. For what then 
dost thou exist* For pleasure’ Surely 1t is un- 
thinkable. 

20. Nature has included in its aim in every case 
the ceasing to be no less than the beginning and 
the duration, just as the man who tosses up his 
ball.2 But what good does the ball gain while 
tossed upwards, or harm as it comes down, or finally 
when it reaches the ground? Or what good accrues 
to the bubble while it coheres, or harm in its 
bursting? And the same holds good with the lamp- 
flame. 


207 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


κα΄. ᾿Εκστρεψον καὶ θέασαι, οἷόν ἐστε, 
γηράσαν δὲ οἷον γίνεται, νοσῆσαν δέ, ἀπο- 
πνεῦσαν 66.7} 

Βραχύβιον καὶ 0 ἐπαινῶν καὶ ὁ ἐπαινούμενος, 
καὶ ὁ μνημονεύων καὶ 0 μνημονευόμενος. προσέτι 
δὲ καὶ ἐν γωνίᾳ τούτου τοῦ κλίματος, καὶ οὐδὲ 
ἐνταῦθα πάντες συμφωνοῦσι, καὶ οὐδὲ αὐτός τις 
ἑαυτῷ" καὶ ὅλη δὲ ἡ ἢ στιγμή. 

κβ.. 1Πρόσεχε τῷ ὑποκειμένῳ ἢ τῇ ἐνεογείᾳ 
ἢ τῷ δόγματι " ἢ τῷ σημαινομένῳ. 

Δικαίως ταῦτα πάσχεις" μᾶλλον δὲ θέλεις 
ἀγαθὸς αὔριον γενέσθαι ἢ σήμερον. εἶναι. 

κγ΄. Ἰράσσω τι; πράσσω ἐπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων 
εὐποιίαν ἀναφέρων" συμβαίνει τί μοι; δέχομαι 
ἐπὶ τοὺς θεοὺς ἀναφέρων καὶ τὴν πάντων πηγήν, 
ἀφ᾽ ἧς πάντα τὰ γινόμενα συμμηρύεται. 

xO. ὋὉποῖόν σοι φαίνεται τὸ λούεσθαι" 
ἔλαιον, ἱδρώς, ῥύπος, ὕδωρ γλοιῶδες, πάντα 
σικχαντά: τοιοῦτον πᾶν μέρος τοῦ βίου καὶ πᾶν 
ὑποκείμενον. 

κε. Λούκιλλα Οὐῆρον, εἶτα Λούκιλλα: Σέ- 
κουνδα | Μάξιμον, εἶτα Σέκουνδα" ᾿Επιτύγχανος 
Διότιμον, εἶτα ᾽᾿Ἐπιτύγχανος" Φαυστίναν ᾽᾿Αντων- 
ivos, εἶτα ᾿Αντωνῖνος. τοιαῦτα πάντα" Κέλερ 
᾿Αδριανόν, εἶτα ἹΚέλερ.3 οἱ δὲ δριμεῖς ἐκεῖνοι ἢ 
προγνωστικοὶ ἢ τετυφωμένοι, ποῦ; οἷον δριμεῖς 
μὲν Χάραξ καὶ Δημήτριος [ὁ ἸΤλατωνικός} 4 καὶ 

1 πορνεῦσαν P: πορνεύσας δὲ A: διαπυῆσαν Leopold: ἀπο- 
πνεῦσαν Gat. 

2. ἢ τῷ δόγματι ἢ τῇ ἐνεργείᾳ P. 

ὁ Stich would transfer Κέλερ... Κέλερ to the beginning 


of the paragraph. 
+ ὃ Πλατωνικὸς possibly a wrong gloss. 


208 


BOOK VITI 


21. Turn it! inside out and see what it is like, 
what it comes to be when old, when sickly, when 
carrion. 

They endure but for a season, both praiser and 
praised, rememberer and remembered.? All this too 
in a tiny corner of this continent, and not even there 
are all in accord, no nor a man with himself; and 
the whole earth is itself a point.* 

22. Fix thy attention on the subject-matter or the 
act or the principle or the thing signified. 

Rightly served! Thou wouldst rather become a 
good man to-morrow than be one to-day. 

°3 Am I doing some thing?’ I do it with reter- 
ence to the well-being of mankind. Does something 
befall me? ITaccept it with a reference to the Gods 
and to the Source of all things from which issue, 
linked together, the things that come into being. 

24, What bathing is when thou thinkest of it—oil, 
sweat, filth, greasy water, everything revolting—such 
is every part of life and every object we meet with. 

25. Lucillat buried Verus, then Lucilla was buried ; 
Secunda Maximus,> then Secunda; Epitynchanus 
Diotimus, then Epitynchanus; Antoninus Faustina, 
then Antoninus. The same tale always: Celer’ 
buried Hadrianus and then Celer was buried. And 
those acute wits, men renowned for their prescience 
or their pride, where are they? Such acute wits, 
for instance, as Charax and Demetrius [the Platonist | 


1 2,6. the body. 2 11. 10; 1v. 8, 8 ὃ. Ὁ iv. ὃ, 8 8: vi. 36. 

4 The mother of Marcus, not as Gataker, Long, ete the 
daughter. 5 15. 5 See Index 11, 

7 Arethas on Lucian, de Salt. § 63, alludes to this passage, 
but Lucian’s Demetrius is the Cynic whom in Demon. § 3 
he couples with Kpietetus (cp also adr. ind. καὶ 19.) See 
Index II. 


209 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Evéaipav καὶ εἴ τις τοιοῦτος. πάντα ἐφήμερα, 
τεθνηκότα πάλαι" ἔνιοι μὲν οὐδὲ ἐπὶ ὀλίγον 
ὦ Νὰ οἱ δὲ εἰς μύθους μεταβαλόντες" 

i δὲ ἤδη καὶ ἐκ μύθων ἐξίτηλοι. τούτων οὖν 
μεμνῆσθαι, ὅτι δεήσει ἤτοι σκεδασθῆναι τὸ 
συγκριμάτιόν σου, ἢ σβεσθῆναι τὸ πνευμάτιον, ἢ 
μεταστῆναι καὶ ἀχλαχοῦ καταταχθῆναι." 

ks. Ἑϊφροσύνη ἀνθρώπου ποιεῖν τὰ ἴδια 
ἀνθρώπου. ἴδιον δὲ ἀνθρώπου εὔνοια πρὸς τὸ 
ὁμόφυλον, ὑπερόρασις τῶν αἰσθητικῶν κινήσεων, 
διάκρισις τῶν πιθανῶν φαντασιῶν, ἐπιθεώρησις 
τῆς τῶν ὅλων φύσεως καὶ τῶν κατ᾽ αὐτὴν 
γινομένων. 

κζ΄. Τρεῖς σχέσεις" ἡ μὲν πρὸς τὸ ἀγγεῖον" 
τὸ περικείμενον" ἡ δὲ πρὸς τὴν θείαν αἰτίαν, ad’ 
ἧς συμβαΐνει πᾶσι πάντα: ἡ δὲ πρὸς τοὺς συμ- 
βιοῦντας. 

cy Ὁ πόνος ἤτοι τῷ σώματι KAKOV" οὐκοῦν 
ἀποφαινέσθω' ἢ τῇ ψυχῇ" ἀλλ᾽ ἔξεστιν αὐτῇ, τὴν 
ἰδίαν αἰθρίαν καὶ γαλήνην διαφυλάσσειν καὶ μὴ 
ὑπολαμβάνειν, ¢ ὅτι κακόν. πᾶσα γὰρ κρίσις καὶ 
ὁρμή καὶ ὄρεξις καὶ ἔκκλισις ἔνδον, καὶ οὐδὲν 8 ὧδε 
ἀναβαίνει. 

κθ΄. ᾿Εξάλειφε τὰς φαντασίας συνεχῶς 
σεαυτῷ λέγων: “Νῦν ἐπ᾽ ἐμοί ἐστιν, ἵνα ἐν ταύτῃ 
τῇ ψυχῇ μηδεμία πονηρία a μηδὲ ἐπιθυμία 
μηδὲ ὅλως ταραχή, τίς" ἀλλὰ βλέπων πάντα, 
ὁποῖά ἐστι, χρῶμαι ἑκάστῳ κατ᾽ ἀξίαν." μέμνησο 
ταύτης τῆς ἐξουσίας κατὰ φύσιν. 


1 καταχθῆναι A. 

“ τὰ ιν oe 

2 αἴτιον PA: ἀγγεῖον (cp. 111, 3, xii. 2) Valckenaer: 
σωμάτιον Cor, ὁ «-τακὸν: P, but cp. viii, 49. 


210 


BOOK VIII 


and Eudaemon, and others like them. All creatures 
of a day, dead loug ago !—some not remembered 
even for a while, others transformed into legends,! 
aud yet others from legends taded into nothmg- 
ness! Bear then in mind that either this thy cum- 
posite self must be scattered abroad, or thy vital 
breath be quenched, or be transferred ὁ and set 
elsewhere. 

26. It brings gladness to a man to dv a man’s true 
work. Anda man’s true work 1s to shew goodwill to 
his own kind, to disdain the motions of fe Senses, 
tu diagnose specious impressions. to take a cuimpre- 
hensive view of the Nature of the Universe nnd all 
that 1s done at her bidding. 

27. Thou hast three relationships—the first to the 
vessel thou art contained in; the second to the 
divine Cause wherefrom issue all things to all: and 
the third to those that dwell with thee ἡ 

28. Pain is an evil either to the body—let the 
body then denounce 1t?—or to the Soul; but the 
Soul can ensure her own fair weather and her 
own calm sea,® and refuse tc aceount it an evil. 
For every conviction and impulse and desire and 
aversion is from within,® and nothing clinbs in 
thither. 

20. Ktface thy impressions,’ saying ever to thyself: 
Now lies it with me that this soul sould harbour no 
wickedness nor lust nor any disturbing element at all ; 
but that, seeing the true nature of all things, 1] sould 
deal ith each as is its due. Bethink thee of this 
power that Nature gives thee. 


BS ΟἿ) 2 Or, lewve thee ; but ἐμ. v. 33. 
24,12; v. 10, 483 1x. 3 ad jin. t+ vb 33. ὅ χῃ, ae 
6 v.19;St. Matt. XV, 18. Py 117, 0. Tee. ὅ.πὶ Td: 


2Τ|, 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


λ΄. Λαλεῖν καὶ ἐν συγκλήτῳ καὶ πρὸς πάνθ᾽ 
ὁντινοῦν κοσμίως, μὴ περιτράνως: Ὕγιεῖ λόγῳ 
χρῆσθαι. 
7 
λα΄. Αὐλὴ Αὐγούστου, γυνή, θυγάτηρ, ἔγγονοι, 
3 “ 3 a 
πρόγονοι, ἀδελφή, ᾿Αγρίππας, συγγενεῖς, οἰκεῖοι, 
͵ a / 3 / ΄ ef 2  ᾿ 
φίλοι, Apecos, Μαικήνας, ἰατροί, θύται" ὅλης αὐλῆς 
θάνατος. εἶτα ἔπιθι τὰς ἄλλας <KaTacTtpodas>! 
μὴ καθ᾽ ἑνὸς ἀνθρώπου θάνατον, οἷον ἸΤομπηίων. 
nm “ va 
κἀκεῖνο δὲ TO ἐπιγραφόμενον τοῖς μνήμασιν, 
co VEN a Ot / 3). ) “ “ 
ἔσχατος τοῦ ἰδίου γένους," ἐπιλογίζεσθαι, πόσα 
ἐσπάσθησαν οἱ πρὸ αὐτῶν, ἵνα διάδοχόν τινα 
3 
καταλίπωσιν'" εἶτα ἀνάγκη ἔσχατόν τινα γεν- 
ὃ / 
έσθαι' πάλιν ὧδε ὅλου γένους θάνατον. 
ἮΝ al 
λβ΄. Συντιθέναι δεῖ τὸν βίον κατὰ μίαν 
πρᾶξιν, καὶ εἰ ἑκάστη τὸ ἑαυτῆς παρέχει," ὡς 
“ ¢, \ A 
οἷόν τε, ἀρκεῖσθαι: ἵνα δὲ TO ἑαυτῆς παρέχῃ. 
n 3 2 
οὐδὲ εἷς σε κωλῦσαι δύναται. “᾿Αλλ᾽ ἐνστήσεταί 
” θ 39 ἡδὲ Vv Ν ὃ / 4 \ f 
τι ἔξωθεν." οὐδὲν els ye τὸ δικαίως ὁ καὶ σωφρόνως 
ete , eu ,ὕ " ἢ \ 
καὶ εὐλογίστως" “Αλλο δέ TL ἴσως ἐνεργητικὸν 
7 33 3 \ n~ XN 3 Ν Ν / 
κωλυθήσεται; ἀλλὰ TH πρὸς αὐτὸ TO κώλυμα 
[οὶ 
εὐαρεστήσει καὶ τῇ ἐπὶ τὸ διδόμενον εὐγνώμονι 
, 5 \ A an > , 
μεταβάσει εὐθὺς ἄλλη πρᾶξις ἀντικαθίστα- 
ται ἐναρμόσουσα εἰς τὴν σύνθεσιν, περὶ ἧς ὁ 
λόγος. 
Ay’. ᾿Ατύφως μὲν λαβεῖν, εὐλύτως δὲ ἀφ- 
εἴναι. 


1 <émiypapas> Breithaupt: Schenkl supplies αὐλὰς with 
a lacuna after: perhaps τὸν ὅλης φυλῆς with Lofft’s μηκέθ᾽ 
ἑνὸς would give the meaning. 

2 πάσχει A: παρέχει P: ἀπέχει Schenkl. 

ὁ ἀπέχῃ PA: παρέχῃ Morus. 

+ A verb 15 missing, e.g. -«-διακεῖσθαι:-- Rend., -«-- πράττειν :» 
Morus. 


212 


BOOK VII 


30. Say thy say in the Senate or to any person 
whatsoever becommgly and naturally} Use sound 
speech. 

31. The court of Augustus—wife, daughter, de- 
scendants, ancestors, sister, Agrippa, hinsfulk, house- 
hold, friends, Areius,? Maecenas, physicians, hara- 
spices—dead, the whole court of them! Pass on 
then to other records and the death not of individuals 
but of a clan, as of the Pompeii. And that well-known 
epitaph, Last of his race—think ov er it aud the anxiety 
shewn by the man’s ancestors that they might leave a 
successor. But after all some one must be the last of 
the lhne—here again the death of a whole race! 

32. Act by act thou must build up thy life, and be 
content, if each act as far as may be fulfils its end.° 
And there is never a man that can prevent it doing 
this. Bui there null be some onpediment from nithout. 
There can be none to thy behaving justly, soberly, 
wisely. But what if some other exercise of activity be 
hindered ? Well, a cheerful acceptance ot the hin- 
drance and a tactful transition to what is allowed 
will enable another action to be substituted that will 
be in keeping with the built-up life of which we are 
speaking. 

33. Accept without arrogance, surrender without 
reluctance. 


1 Dr. Bigg does not scruple to say that Marcus spoke 
in such a pedantic jargon as to be unintelligible to hes hecrers ' 
This 1s pitiable nonsense. See Fronto, ad Ant ἃ. 1: quanto 
studio quantoque farore et voluptute dwentcm te MeUeLit seneetus 
populusgue Romanus ; cp. ad Caes. i 1. 

2 Domestic philosopher to Augustus, as Rusticus was to 
Mareus. See Them. Orat. v 63d; xm. 1756; den ad 
Marcam, ἃ 4. 

3 Or, receives its due reward (ἀπέχει). 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


λδ΄, Ei ποτε εἶδες χεῖρα ἀποκεκομμένην ἢ 
πόδα, ἢ κεφαλὴν ἀποτετμημένην χωρίς πού 
ποτε ἀπὸ τοῦ λουποῦ σώματος κειμένην" τοιοῦτον 
ἑαυτὸν ποιεῖ, ὅσον ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῷ, ὁ μὴ θέλων. τὸ 
συμβαῖνον καὶ ἀποσχίξων ἑαυτὸν ἢ ὁ ἀκοινώνη- 
τόν τί πράσσων. ἀπέρριψαι πού ποτε ἀπὸ 
τῆς κατὰ φύσιν ἑνώσεως" ἐπεφύκεις γὰρ μέρος" 
νῦν «δὲξ σεαυτὸν ἀπέκοψας. ἀλλ᾽ ὧδε κομψὸν 
ἐκεῖνο, ὅτι ἔξεστί σοι πάλιν ἑνῶσαι σεαυτὸν. 
τοῦτο ἄλλῳ μέρει. οὐδενὶ θεὸς ἐπέτρεψεν, χώρισ- 
θέντι καὶ διακοπέντι πάλιν συνελθεῖν. ἀλλὰ 
σκέψαι τὴν χρηστότητα, 7 τετίμηκε τὸν ἄνθρωτ- 

\ 
ον" Kal γὰρ ἵνα τὴν ἀρχὴν μ᾽ ἀπορραγῇ ἀπὸ 
τοῦ ὅλον, ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ ἐποίησεν" καὶ ἀπορραγέντι 
πάλιν ἐπανελθεῖν καὶ συμφῦναι καὶ τὴν τοῦ 
μέρους τάξιν ἀπολαβεῖν ἐποίησεν. 

re’. “Ὥσπερ τὰς ἄλλας δυνάμεις ἑκάστῳ ' τῶν 
λογικῶν "ἢ σχεδὸν ὅσον +” ὴ τῶν λογικῶν φύσις, 
οὕτως καὶ ταύτην Tap αὐτῆς εἰλήφαμεν. ὃν 
τρόπον γὰρ ἐκείνη. πᾶν τὸ ἐνιστάμενον καὶ ἀντι- 
βαῖνον ἐπιπεριτρέπει καὶ κατατάσσει εἰς τὴν 
εἱμαρμένην, καὶ μέρος ἑαυτῆς ποιεῖ, οὕτως καὶ τὸ 
λογικὸν ζῷον δύναται πᾶν κώλυμα ὕλην ἑαυτοῦ 
ποιεῖν, καὶ χρῆσθαι αὐτῷ, ἐφ᾽ οἷον ἂν καὶ 
Ν 
ὥρμησεν. 

ς΄. Μή σε συγχείτω ἡ τοῦ ὅλου βίου φαν- 
τασία. μὴ συμπερινόει, ἐπίπονα οἷα καὶ ὅσα 
πιθανὸν ἐπιγεγενῆσθαι, ἀλλὰ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον τῶν 
παρόντων ἐπερώτα σεαυτόν: τί τοῦ ἔργου τὸ 
ἀφόρητον καὶ ἀνύποιστον; αἰσχυνθήσῃ γὰρ 

1 


~“ 


ἕκαστος P. 
2 σχεδὸν ὅσον : ἐσκέδασεν Cor.: -- ἔδωκεν Schultz, 


214 


BOOK VIII 


34. Thou hast seen a hand cut off or a foot, or a 
head severed from the trunk, and lying at some 
distance from the rest of the body. Just so does the 
man treat himself, as far as he may, who wills not 
what befalls and severs himself from mankind or acts 
unsocially. Say thou hast been torn away mm some 
sort from the unity of Nature; for by the law of thy 
birth thou wast a part; but now thou hast cut 
thyself off. Yet here comes in that exquisite pro- 
vision, that thou canst return again to thy unity.) To 
no other part has God granted this, to come together 
again, when once separated and cleft asunder. Are, 
behold His goodness, wherewith He hath glorified 
man! For He hath let it rest with a man that he be 
never rent away from the Whole, and if he do rend 
himself away, to return again and grow on to the 
rest and take up his position again as part. 

35. Just as the Nature of rational things has 
given each rational being almost all his other 
powers, so also have we received this one from 
it; that, as this Nature moulds to its purpose what- 
ever interference or opposition it meets, and gives it 
a place in the destined order of things, and makes it 
a part of itself, so also can the rational creature 
convert every hindrance into material for itself? and 
utilize it for its own purposes. 

36. Let not the mental picture of life as a whole 
confound thee. Fill not thy thoughts with what and 
how many ills may conceivably await thee, but in every 
present case ask thyself: H'hat as there in ihis experi- 
ence so crushing, so insupportable? Thou wilt blush 


1 Sen. Bp. 98: leet in integrum resttut (a legal phrase 
for a restoration to all rights). 
2 iv, 1s v. 20; νι. 50. 


215 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


, ¢ 
ὁμολογῆσαι. ἔπειτα ἀναμίμνησκε σεαυτόν, ὅτι 
οὔτε τὸ “μέλλον οὔτε τὸ παρῳχηκὸς βαρεῖ σε 
ἀλλὰ ἀεὶ τὸ παρόν. τοῦτο δὲ κατασμικρύνεται, 
ἐὰν αὐτὸ μόνον TEpLlop ἰσῃς καὶ ἀπελέγχῃς τὴν 
διάνοιαν, εἰ πρὸς τοῦτο ψιλὸν ἀντέχειν μὴ 
δύναται. 

no. Myr νῦν παρακάθηται Th τοῦ κυρίου" 
σορῷ TavOeva ἡ ἢ ἸΠέργαμος; τί δὲ; τῇ ᾿Αδριανοῦ 
Χαβρίας ἢ Διότιμος; γελοῖον. τί δέ; εἰ παρεκάθ- 
ηντο, ἔμελλον αἰσθάνεσθαι; τί δέ, εἰ ἠσθάνοντο, 
ἔμελλον ἡσθήσεσθαι; τί δέ, εἰ ἥδοντο, “ἔμελλον 
οὗτοι ἀθάνατοι εἶναι; οὐ καὶ τούτους πρῶτον μὲν 
γραίας καὶ γέροντας γενέσθαι οὕτως εἵμαρτο, 
εἶτα ἀποθανεῖν; τί οὖν ὕστερον ἔμελλον ἐκεῖνοι 
a Ul σι n 
ποιεῖν, τούτων ὠποθανόντων; γράσος πᾶν τοῦτο 
καὶ λύθρον ἐν θυλάκῳ. 
/ 
Ay. Hi δύνασαι ὀξὺ βλέπειν, βλέπε,7 “ xpi 
55 .) 
νων, φησί, “ σοφώτατα. }* 
/ v4 \ bd \ 
AO. Δικαιοσύνης κατεξαναστατικὴν ἀρετὴν 
ω An n an / fal 
οὐχ ὁρῶ ἐν τῇ τοῦ λογικοῦ ζῴου κατασκευῇ: 
a ¢ ω] 
ἡδονῆς δὲ OPO τὴν ἐγκράτειαν. 
,ὔ 3 Ν 3 / \ \ ig “ Ν “ 
μ. αν ὠφέλῃς τὴν σὴν ὑπόληψιν περὶ τοῦ 
A a Ν ἴω 
λυπεῖν σε δοκοῦντος, αὐτὸς ἐν τῷ ἀσφαλεστάτῳ 
3 / 
ἕστηκας. “Τίς αὐτός; ὁ λόγος. “’AAN οὐκ 
2 \ r 3) ” 5 A ς \ ͵ > \ 
εὐμὶ λόγος. ἔστω. οὐκοῦν ὁ μὲν λόγος αὐτὸς 
ς Ν \ , 2 ΄, 2 a 
ἑαυτὸν μὴ λυπείτω. εἰ δέ TL ἄλλο GOL κακῶς 
/ Ἂ 
ἔχει, ὑπολαβέτω αὐτὸ περὶ αὑτοῦ. 
1 τοῦ κυρίου P: τοῦ κυροῦ A: [rod] Οὐήρου Salm., but 
Marcus does not speak of Lucius as Verus. 
5 σοφωτάτοις Ὁ: σοφωτάτης (with δικαιοσύνης, $39) A- 
σοφώτατα Xyl. 





1 See on vi 29. 
* Lucian (7) (may. §§ 10, 22), mentions Panthela as the 


216 


BOOK VIII 


to confess. Remind thyself further that it is not the 
future nor the past but the present always that 
brings thee its burden. But this is reduced to in- 
significance if thou isolate it, and take thy mind to 
task + if it cannot hold out against this mere trifle 

37, Does Pantheia? now watch by the urn of her 
lord, or Pergamus ? What, does Chabrias or Diotimus 
by Hadrian’s? Absurd! And had they sat there 
till now, would the dead have been aware of it? 
and, if aware of it, would they have been pleased? 
and, if pleased, would that have made the mourners 
immortal? Was 1t not destined that these hke 
others should become old women and old men 
and then die? What then, when they were dead, 
would be left for those whom they had mourned 
to do? It is all stench and foul corruption ‘in 
a sack of skin.’ 

38. Hast thou keenness of sight? Use it ruth 
judgment ever so wisely, as the saying goes. 

39. In the constitution of rational creatures I see 
no virtue incompatible with justice, but incompatible 
with pleasure 1 see—continence. 

40. Take away thy opmion* as to any imagined 
pain, and thou thyself art set in surest safety. 
What is ‘thyself’? Reason. But Lam not reason. 
Be it so. At all events let the Reason not cause 
itself pain, but if any part in thee is amiss, let it 
form its own opinion about itself. 
matchless concubine of τῷ μεγάλῳ βασιλεῖ χρήστῳ Kal ἡμέρῳ 
ὄντι (meaning apparently Lucius Verus). Lucian (Vayr. 
831) speaks of of κελεύοντες καὶ παραμένειν τινὰς οἰκέτας Τοῖς 
τάφοις. 

 Ερίοῦ Fray. 94. ep. Diog. Laert. Annwarchus, § 2 ; 
Zeno Beat. § 5. Howell, Familiar Letters, vu. 2, 50, speaks 
of ‘‘this sinall skinful or bagful of hones.” 


wii. 16; viit 47. I vai. 33. 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


? $ \ 3 Ax \ fa) 
μα. Ἔμποδισμὸς αἰσθήσεως κακὸν ζωτικῆς 
¢ an ἔ 7 Ν a 
φύσεως" ἐμποδισμὸς ὁρμῆς ὁμοίως κακὸν ζωτικῆς 
f 5 7 3 ξ / 3 \ 
φύσεως. ἔστι δέ TL ἄλλο ὁμοίως ἐμποδιστικὸν 
καὶ κακὸν τῆς φυτικῆς κατασκευῆς. οὕτως 
τοίνυν ἐμποδισμὸς νοῦ κακὸν νοερᾶς φύσεως. 
πάντα δὴ ταῦτα ἐπὶ σεαυτὸν μετάφερε. πόνος 
a δ \ e , Ὑ e / 
«ἢ» ἡδονὴ ἅπτεται cov; ὄψεται ἡ αἴσθησις. 
ὁρμήσαντι ἔνστημα ἐγένετο; εἰ μὲν ἀνυπεξαιρέτ- 
ws ὁρμᾷς, ἤδη ὡς λογικοῦ κακόν. εἰ δὲ τὸ 
f 
κοινὸν λαμβάνεις, οὔπω βέβλαψαι οὐδὲ ἐμ- 
, \ / a a > \ 2 
πεπόδισαι. τὰ μέντοι τοῦ νοῦ ἴδια οὐδεὶς ἄλλος 
΄ ω 
εἴωθεν ἐμποδίζειν: τούτου γὰρ οὐ πῦρ, οὐ σίδη- 
ρος, οὐ τύραννος, οὐ βλασφημία, οὐχ ὁτιοῦν 
e A“ \ 
ἅπτεται' ““ὅταν γένηται σφαῖρος, κυκλοτερὴς 
? 
μένει. Ὑ Ἴ: 
ἴω \ \ 
μβ΄. Οὐκ εἰμὶ ἄξιος ἐμαυτὸν λυπεῖν" οὐδὲ γὰρ 
‘ f 
ἄλλον πώποτε ἑκὼν ἐλύπησα. 
, 
μγ΄. Evdpaives ἄλλον ἄλλο: ἐμὲ δέ, ἐὰν ὑγιὲς 
/ 
ἔχω τὸ ἡγεμοιικόν, μὴ ἀποστρεφόμενον μήτε 
/ a 
ἄνθρωπόν τινα μήτε «τ τῶν ἀνθρώποις 
Vi a“ “ 
συμβαινόντων: ἀλλὰ πᾶν εὐμενέσιν ὀφθαλμοῖς 
€ ω / 
ὁρῶν τε Kal δεχόμενον καὶ χρώμενον ἑκάστῳ KAT 
ἀξίαν. 
δ' T “A 9 ὃ \ \ / nm 7 
μδ΄. Τοῦτον " ἰδοὺ τὸν χρόνον σεαυτῷ χάρισαι. 
/ ral 
οἱ τὴν ὑστεροφημίαν μᾶλλον διώκοντες οὐ 
/ a) , ra) 
λογίζονται, OTL ἄλλοι τοιοῦτοι μέλλουσεν ἐκεῖνοι 
εἶναι, οἷοί εἰσιν οὗτοι, ods βαροῦνται' κἀκεῖνοι 
1 μονίῃ Rend. (cp. xii. 3): by changing σφαῖρος to σφαῖρα 
(xi. 12) we get a senarius. “ τουτονὶ δὴ Leop. 
218 


BOOK VIII 


41. To the animal nature a thwarting of sense- 
perception is an evil, as is alsoto the same nature the 
thwarting of impulse. There is similarly some other 
thing that can thwart the constitution of plants and 
is an evil to them. Thus then the thwarting of 
intelligence is an evil to the intelligent nature. 
Transfer the application of all this to thvself. 
Does pain, does pleasure take hold of thee? The 
senses Shall look to it. Wast thou impelled to a 
thing and’wast thwarted? If thy impulse counts on 
an unconditional fulfilment, failure at once becomes 
an evil to thee as a rational creature. But accept 
the universal limitation, and thou hast so far received 
no hurt nor even been thwarted! Indeed no one 
else is in a way to thwart the inner purposes of 
the mind. For it no fire can touch, nor steel. nor 
tyrant, nor obloquy,” nor any thing soever: a sphere ° 
once formed continues round and true. 

42, It were not mght that I should pain myself 
for not even another have I ever knowingly 
pained.* 

43, One thing delights one, another thing another. 
To me it is a delight if [ keep my ruling Reason 
sound, not looking askance at man or anything that 
befalls man, but regarding all things with kindly 
eyes, accepting and using everything for its intrinsic 
worth. 

44, See thou dower thyself with this present time. 
Those that yearn rather for after-fame do not realize 
that their successors are sure to be very much the 
same as the contemporaries whom they find such a 


iyi. 50. 2 vil. 68; Hpict. 1. 22.43. 2 x1 125 xii. 3. 
4 ep. Them. Orat. »v. p. 191 B, quoted App. 11.3; cy. Diog 
Laert. Zeno 64. 


210 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


δὲ θνητοί. τί dé ὅλως πρὸς σέ, ἂν ἐκεῖνοι φωναῖς 
ἴω 3 7 4 
τοιαύταις ἀπηχῶσιν ἢ ὑπόληψιν τοιαύτην περὶ 
σοῦ ἔχωσιν; 
με΄. ἾΑρόν με καὶ βάλε, ὅπου θέλεις. ἐκεῖ 1 γὰρ 
Ψ \ > 7 ἰγὰ / 2 4 
ἕξω τὸν ἐμὸν δαίμονα ἵλεων, τουτέστιν apKov- 
/ \ \ fol n 
μενον, εἰ ἔχοι καὶ ἐνεργοίη κατὰ τὸ ἑξῆς τῇ ἰδίᾳ 
κατασκευῇ. 
53 ca) 4 7 3 > \ fa) ” 
Apa τοῦτο ἄξιον, ἵνα Ov αὐτὸ κακῶς μοι ἔχῃ 
/ “ 
ἡ ψυχὴ καὶ χείρων ἑαυτῆς ἢ ταπεινουμένη, 
/ ‘ 
ὀρεγομένη, συνδυομένη,) + πτυρομένη; καὶ τί 
, 
εὑρήσεις τούτου ἄξιον; 
/ 2 7 ¢ 
με΄. ᾿Ανθρώπῳ οὐδενὶ συμβαίνειν τι δύναται, ὃ 
3 »᾿ 3 XN 7 3 \ / oa > 
οὐκ ἔστιν ἀνθρωπικὸν σύμπτωμα: οὐδὲ Bol, ὃ οὐκ 
᾽ wo SF 2QO\ 5 7 a 2 5) 3 ὔ 
ἔστι βοϊκὸν" οὐδὲ ἀμπέλῳ, ὃ οὐκ ἔστιν ἀμπελικόν" 
οὐδὲ λίθῳ, ὃ οὐκ ἔστι λίθου ἴδιον. εἰ οὖν 
ec “ἡ , ἃ \ o> Ν / , oN 
ἑκάστῳ συμβαίνει, ὃ καὶ εἴωθε καὶ πέφυκε, Ti ἂν 
/ 3 \ f / 
δυσχεραίνοις; ov yap ἀφόρητόν σοι ἔφερεν ἡ 
κοινὴ φύσις. 
ον Ν n 
μζ΄. Ei μὲν διά te τῶν ἐκτὸς AUTH, οὐκ 
5 af 2 Ἂ 2 Ν \ \ Ν 5 κι 
ἐκεῖνό σοι ἐνοχλεῖ, ἀλλὰ τὸ σὸν περὶ αὐτοῦ 
“A “ νιν 3 Ὰ > \ / 3 ’ 
κρῖμα. τοῦτο δὲ ἤδη ἐξαλεῖψαι ἐπὶ cot ἐστιν. εἰ 
A ων “ ‘a / / τ 
δὲ λυπεῖ σέ τι τῶν ἐν τῇ σῇ διαθέσει, τίς ὁ 
/ A \ , cr \ \ 3 
κωλύων διορθῶσαι τὸ δόγμα; ὅμως δὲ Kal εἰ 
tal t / ~ 
λυπῇ, ὅτι οὐχὶ τόδε τι ἐνεργεῖς ὑγιές σοι 
/ “ “ al 
φαινόμενον, τί οὐχὶ μᾶλλον ἐνεργεῖς ἢ λυπῇ; 
cor A ν᾿ 2 ; / 27 2 \ ® a nm 
NAB LOYUPOTEPOY TL ἐνίσταται. μὴ οὖν λυποῦ 
Ν ,ὔ “) \ ἴω. 
οὐ γὰρ παρὰ σὲ ἡ αἰτία τοῦ μὴ ἐνεργεῖσθαι. 
ce? \ 5 5 en \ 9 , ; ” 
Αλλὰ οὐκ ἄξιον ζῆν μὴ ἐνεργουμένουν τούτον. 
1 κἀκεῖ Kron. 2 συνδεομένη Gat, 


220 


BOOK VIIi 


burden, and no less mortal. What is it anyway to 
thee if there be this or that far-off echo of their 
voices, or if they have this or that opmion about 
thee Ὁ 

45. Take me up and cast me where thou wilt. For 
even there will I keep my ‘genius’ tranquil, that 
is, content if in rtself and in its activity it follow the 
laws of its own constitution. 

Is this worth while, that on its account my soul 
should be ill at ease and fall below itself, grovelling, 
grasping, floundering, affrighted? What could make 
it worth while ὃ 

46. Nothing can befall a man that is not a 
contingency natural to man; nor befall an ox, that is 
not natural to oxen, nor a vine that is not natural to 
a vine, nor a stone that is not proper to it. If 
therefore only what is natural and customary befalls 
each, why be aggrieved? For the common Nature 
brings thee nothing that thou canst not bear.' 

47. When thou art vexed at some external cross, 
it is not the thing itself that troubles thee,? but thy 
judgment on it. And this thou canst annul in a 
moment. But if thou art vexed at something in thine 
own character, who can prevent thee from rectifying 
the principle that 1s to blame?* So also if thou 
art vexed + at not undertaking that which seems to 
thee a sound act, why not rather undertake it than be 
vexed? But there is a lion in the path! Be not vexed 
then, for the blame of inaction rests not with thee. 
But life is not worth living, this left undone. Depart 


1 op. St. Paul, 1 Cor. x. 13. 
2 cp. Epict Jan. 5. 

3 vin. 40, 

+ vy. 9,36; vii. 10, x1 19 


221 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἄπιθι οὖν ἐκ τοῦ ζῆν εὐμενής, ἡ καὶ ὁ ἐνεργῶν 
τ ἀν τς ἅμα ἴλεως τοῖς ἐνισταμένοις. 

μη. Μεέμνησο, ὅτι ἀκαταμάχητον γένεται τὸ 
ὴ γεμονικόν, ὅταν εἰς ἑαυτὸ συστραφὲν ἀρκεσθῇ 
ἑαυτῷ μὴ ποιοῦντι, ὃ μὴ θέλει, κἂν ἀλόγως 
παρατάξηται. τί οὖν, ὅταν καὶ μετὰ λόγου 
«καὶ; περιεσκεμμένως κρίνῃ περί τενος; διὰ τοῦτο 
ἀκρόπολίς ἐστιν ἡ ἐλευθέρα παθῶν διάνοια' 
οὐδὲν γὰρ ὀχυρώτερον ἔχει ἄνθρωπος, ἐφ᾽ ὃ κατα- 
φυγὼν ἀνώλωτος λοιπὸν ἂν εἴη. ὁ μὲν οὖν μὴ 
ἑωρακὼς τοῦτο ἀμαθής" ὁ δὲ ἑωρακὼς καὶ μὴ 
καταφεύγων ἀτυχής. 

μθ. Μηδὲν πλέον σαυτῷ λέγε, ὧν αἱ προ- 
ηγούμεναι φαντασίαι ἀναγγέλλουσιν. ἤγγελται, 
ὅτι ὁ δεῖνά TE κακῶς λέγει. ἤγγενται τοῦτο: τὸ 
δέ, ὅτε βέβλαψαι, οὐκ ἤγγελχται. βλέπω ὅτι 
νοσεῖ τὸ παιδίον. βλέπω: ὅτι δὲ κινδυνεύει οὐ 
βλέπω. οὕτως οὖν μένε ἀεὶ ἐπὶ τῶν πρώτων 
φαντασιῶν, καὶ μηδὲν αὐτὸς ἔνδοθεν ἐπίλεγε, καὶ 
οὐδέν σοι γίνεται" μᾶλλον δὲ ἐπίλεγε, ὡς γνωρ- 
ἔζων ἕκαστα τῶν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ συμβαινόντων. 

γ΄. “Σίκυος πικρός.᾽ ἄφες. “Βάτοι ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ." 
ἔκκλινον. ἀρκεῖ. μὴ προσεπείπης" “Τί δὲ καὶ 
ἐγίνετο ταῦτα ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ; ἐπεὶ καταγελασθήσῃ 
ὑπὸ ἀνθρώπου φυσιολόγου, ὡς ἂν καὶ ὑπὸ 
τέκτονος καὶ σκυτέως γεχλασθείης κατωγινώσκων, 
ὅτι ἐν τῷ ἐργαστηρίῳ ξέσματα καὶ περιτμήματα 


lil. 1; v. 29; Epict. 1. 24, § 20. ὄν. 98, 
2 xi. 8. In both places Marcus seems to have the Christ- 
ians in mind. 

4 ep, Fronto, ad Ver 11. 1 (ot Marcus): arcem muniiam el 


invictam et imexpuynabdem quae in fi atris éwe pectore sida est. 


222 


BOOK VIII 


then from life,! dying with the sume kindly feelings 
as he who effects his purpose, and accepting with ἃ 
good grace the obstacles that thwart thee. 

48. Never forget thatthe ruling Reason shews itself 
unconquerable when, concentrated in itselij- it is 
content with itself soit do nothing that itdoth not will, 
even if it refuse from mere opposition ® and not from 
reason—much more, then, 1f it judge of a thing on 
reasonable grounds and advisedly. Therefore the 
Mind, unimastered by passions, is a very citadel, for a 
man has no fortress more impregnable + vyherem to 
find refuge and be untaken tor ever. He indeed 
who hath not seen this is ignurant, but he that hath 
seen il and takes not refuge therein is luckless. 

49. Say no more to thyself than what the initial 
mapressions report. This has been told thee, that. so 
and so speaks ill of thee. This das been told thee, 
but it has not been told thee that thou art harmed.” 
I see that my childis ailing. Isee it, but 1 do not see 
that he is m danger. Keep then ever to first im- 
pressions and supplement them not on thy part from 
within, and nothing* happens to thee. And yet do 
supplement them with this, that thou art tumiliar 
with every possible contingency in the world. 

50. The gherkin is bitter. ‘Toss τὸ away. There 
are briars in the path. Turn aside. That sufiices, 
and thou needest not to add: Hhy are such things 
found in the world? For thou wouldst be a leugh- 
ing stock to any student of nature; just as thou 
wouldst be laughed at by a carpenter and a cobbler 
if thou tookest them to task because in their shops 
are seen sawdust and parings from what they are 


αν 7 GUC. 6 Yet Capit. (xx. 8 ὅ) says that Marcus 
was suae curiosissimua famae, cp. ibid. xxii. $65 xxin. $7, 9; 
xxix. § 5. τῳ, ὙΠ|. 28. 


223 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τῶν κατασκευαζομένων ὁρᾷς. καίτοι ἐκεῖνοί γε 
ἔχουσι, ποῦ αὐτὰ ῥίψωσιν' ἡ δὲ τῶν ὅλων φύσις 
ἔξω οὐδὲν ἔχει" ἀλλὰ τὸ θαυμαστὸν τῆς τέχνης 
ταύτης ἐστίν, ὅτι περιορίσασα ἑαυτὴν πᾶν τὸ 
ἔνδον διαφθείρεσθαι καὶ γηράσκειν καὶ ἄχρηστον 
εἶναι δοκοῦν, εἰς ἑαυτὴν μεταβάλλει, καὶ ὅτι 
πάλιν ἄλλα νεαρὰ ἐκ τούτων αὐτῶν ποιεῖ" ἵνα 
μήτε οὐσίας ἔξωθεν χρή ξῃ μήτε, ὅπου ἐκβάλῃ τὰ 
σαπρότερα, προσδέηται. ἀρκεῖται οὖν καὶ χώρᾳ 
τῇ ἑαυτῆς καὶ ὕλῃ τῇ ἑαυτῆς καὶ τέχνῃ τῇ ἰδίᾳ. 
να΄. Μήτε ἐν ταῖς πράξεσιν ἐπισύρειν μήτε 
ἐν ταῖς ὁμιλίαις φύρειν μήτε ἐν ταῖς φαντασίαις 
ἀλᾶσθαι: μήτε τῇ ψυχῇ καθάπαξ συνέλκεσθαι 
ἢ ἐκθόρνυσθαι' μήτε ἐν τῷ βίῳ ἀσχολεῖσθαι. 
“Κτείνουσι, κρεανομοῦσι, κατάραις ἐλαύνουσι." 
τί οὖν ταῦτα πρὸς τὸ τὴν διάνοιαν μένειν 
καθαράν, φρενήρη, σώφρονα, δικαίαν; οἷον εἴ τις 
παραστὰς πΉ γῇ διαυγεῖ καὶ γλυκείᾳ βλασφημοίη 
αὐτήν, ἡ δὲ οὐ παύεται πότιμον ἀναβλύξουσα: 
κἂν πηλὸν ἐμβάλῃ, κἂν κοπρίαν, τάχιστα 
διασκεδάσει αὐτὰ καὶ ἐκκλύσει καὶ οὐδαμῶς 
βαφήσεται. πῶς οὖν πηγὴν ἀέναον ἕξεις καὶ μὴ 
φρέαρ'; av φυλάσσῃς σεαυτὸν πάσης ὥρας εἰς 
ἐλευθερίαν μετὰ τοῦ εὐμενῶς καὶ ἁπλῶς καὶ 
αἰδημόνως. 
vB. Ὁ μὲν μὴ εἰδώς, ὅ τι ἐστὶ κόσμος, οὐκ 
οἶδεν, ὅπου ἐστίν. ὁ δὲ μὴ εἰδὼς πρὸς ὃ TL 
πέφυκεν, οὐκ οἶδεν ὅστις ἐστίν, οὐδὲ τί ἐστι 
κόσμος. ὁ δὲ ἕν τι τούτων ἀπολιπὼν οὐδὲ πρὸς 
1 καὶ μὴ φρέαρ omit AD; ἂν φυλάσσῃς AD; φύου Ῥ, 


1 Or, for space, material, craftsmanshyp she ts content with 
herself alone. 


224 


BOOK Vil 


making, And yet they have space for the eet 
of their fragments ; while the Universal Nature has 
nothing outside herself; but the marvel of her crafts- 
manship is that, though she is limited to herself, 
she transmutes into her own substance all that 
within her seems to be perishing and decrepit and 
useless, and again from these very things produces 
other new ones; whereby she shews that she neither 
wants any substance outside herself nor needs a 
corner where she may cast her decaying matter. Her 
own space, her own material, her own proper crafts- 
inanship is all that she requires.! 

51. Be not dilatory in doing, nor confused in 
conversation, nor vague in thought; let not thy 
soul be wholly concentred in itself nor uncon- 
trollably agitated ; leave thyself leisure in thy life. 

They hill us, they cut us limb fiom limb, they hunt 
us mith evecrations!* How does that prevent thy 
mind being still pure, sane, sober, just? Imagine a 
man to stand by a crystal-clear spring of sweet 
water, and to rail at it; vet it fails not to bubble 
up with wholesome water. Throw in mud or even 
filth and it will quickly winnow them away and 
purge itself of them and take never a stain. How 
then possess thyself of a living fountain and no 
mere well?? By guiding thyself carefully every 
hour into freedom with kindliness, simplicity, and 
modesty. . 

52. He that knoweth not what the Universe is know- 
eth not where he is. He that knoweth not the end of 
its being knoweth not who he is or what the Universe 
is But he that is wanting in the knowledge of any 

2 Marcus must be thinkimg of the Chiistians. ἐμ. vir 68. 
See Appendix. 3 St. John, iv. 14-16. 

+ ep. Epict. 11, 24, § 19. 

225 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


δ cs / 
6 τι αὐτὸς πέφυκεν εἴποι. τίς οὖν φαινεταῖί σοι 
la 7 δ , 
ὁ τὸν τῶν κροτούντων ἔπαινον φεύγων ἢ διώκων,Τ! 
οἱ οὐθ᾽ ὅπου εἰσὶν οὔτε οἵτινές εἶσι γινώσκουσιν; 
t 3 a 7 ς Ν 3 f \ 
νγ΄. ᾿ἱὑπαινεῖσθαι θέλεις ὑπὸ ἀνθρώπου τρὶς 
n la / 7 7 
τῆς ὥρας ἑαυτῷ καταρωμένου; ἀρέσκειν θέλεις 
ἃ Ἂ ’ “A 
ἀνθρώπῳ, ὃς οὐκ ἀρέσκει ἑαυτῷ; ἀρέσκει ἑαυτῷ 
ta / / 
ὁ μετανοῶν ἐφ᾽ ἅπασι σχεδόν, ols πράσσει; 
“A n / 
vd. Μηκέτι μόνον συμπνεῖν τῷ περιέχοντι 
2.3 3 2 37 \ “ A 77 
ἀέρι, ἀλλ’ ἤδη καὶ συμφρονεῖν τῷ περιέχοντι 
[οὶ Ν πὶ \ / 
πάντα νοερῷ. οὐ γὰρ ἧττον ἡ νοερὰ δύναμις πάντη 
/ [οὶ 
κέχυται καὶ διωαπεφοίτηκε τῷ σπάσαι δυναμένῳ, 
ἤπερ ἡ ἀερώδης τῷ ἀναπνεῦσαι δυναμένῳ. 
/ n \ ς , 50 Ν 7, \ 
ve. Τενικῶς μὲν ἡ κακία οὐδὲν βλάπτει τὸν 
, € \ \ 7 >Q\ / \ 
κόσμον, ἡ δὲ κατὰ μέρος οὐδὲν βλάπτει τὸν 
ἕτερον. μόνῳ δὲ βλαβερά ἐστι τούτω, ᾧ ἐπι 
ὡ ρ - OVE ; ᾿ ρ ge . ᾧ SIRES 
\ > ΔᾺ n 
τέτραπται καὶ ἀπηλλάχθαι αὐτῆς, ὁπόταν πρῶτον 
οὗτος θελήσῃ. 
Ι͂ lal 3 fa A \ ΜᾺ , 
ve. Τῷ ἐμῷ προαιρετικῷ τὸ τοῦ πλησίον 
\ / 2 7 γ 
προαιρετικὸν ἐπίσης ἀδιάφορον ἐστιν, ὡς καὶ τὸ 
πνευμάτιον αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ σαρκίδιον. καὶ γὰρ εἰ 
Ψ / 3 / Ψ la c/ ‘ 
OTL μάλιστα ἀλλήλων ἕνεκεν γεγόναμεν, ὅμως TA 
\ a) 
ἡγεμονικὰ ἡμῶν ἕκαστον τὴν ἰδίαν κυρίαν ἔχει: 
/ / a “ 
ἐπεί τοι ἔμελλεν ἡ τοῦ πλησίον κακία ἐμοῦ κακὸν 
4 Ψ 3 / Qn A 7 \ , 3 
εἶναι" ὅπερ οὐκ ἔδοξε τῷ θεῷ, ἵνα μὴ ἐπ᾽ ἄλλῳ ἢ 
ΝΟΌΣ. \ 2 As 
TO ἐμὲ ἀτυχεῖν. 
͵ ς te a 
vO. O ἥλιος κατακεχύσθαι δοκεῖ, καὶ πάντη 
/ 3 \ 
γε κέχυται, OU μὴν ἐκκέχυται. ἡ γὰρ χύσις αὕτη 
1 ἡ δίων (δίω ΑἹ) ἢ Ps διώκων 88.: ἢ ψόγον φεύγων ἣ ἔπαινον 
διώκων Gat. 
226 


BOOK VITl 


of these things could not tell what is the end of his 
own being. What then must we think of those that 
court or eschew the verdict of the clappers. who have 
no conception where or who they are? 

53. Carest thou to be praised by a man who 
execrates himself thrice within the hour? to win the 
approval of a man who wins not his own? Can he 
be said to wm his own approval who regrets almost 
every thing he does? 

54. Be no longer content merely to breathe in 
unison with the all-embracing air, but from this 
moment think also in unison with the all-embracing 
Intelligence. [or that intelligent faculty is every- 
where diffused and offers itself on every side to him 
that can take it in no less than the aerial to him 
that can breathe. 

55. Taken collectively wickedness does no harm 
to the Universe,! and the particular wickedness does 
no harm to others. It is harmful to the one 
individual alone, and he has been given the option 
of being quit of it the first moment he pleases. 

56. Τὸ my power of choice? the power of choice of 
my neighbour is as much a matter of indifference as 
is his vital breath and his flesh. For however much 
we may have been made for one another, yet our 
ruling Reason is in each case master in its own house. 
Else might my neighbour's wickedness become my 
bane; and this was not God’s will, that another 
might not have my unhappiness in his keeping.’ 

57. The sun’s light is diffused down, as it seems, 
yes, and in every direction, yet it does not difiuse 
itself away. For this diffusion is an extension. At any 


ἵν 86 5 Not distinguishable from the ‘ruling Reason.’ 
8 Sen. Hp 10 ad med. : nemo nisi vitio suo miser est. 


227 
ο 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τίσις ἐστίν. “dKtives” γοῦν αἱ αὐγαὶ αὐτοῦ 
ἀπὸ τοῦ “ ἐκτείνεσθαι" λέγονται. ὁποῖον δέ 
Te ἐστὶν ἀκτίς, ἴδοις ἄν, εἰ διά τινος στενοῦ εἰς 
ἐσκιασμένον οἶκον τὸ ἀφ᾽ ἡλίου φῶς εἰσδυόμενον 
θεάσαιο: τείνεται ῖ' γὰρ κατ᾽ εὐθύ, καὶ ὥσπερ 
διερείδεται 5 πρὸς τὸ στερέμνιον, ὅ τι ἂν ἀπαντ- 
non, διεῖργον τὸν ἐπέκεινα ἀέρα' ἐνταῦθα δὲ 
ἔστη καὶ οὐ κατώλεσθεν οὐδὲ ἔπεσεν. τοιαύτην 
οὖν τὴν χύσιν καὶ διάχυσιν τῆς διανοίας εἶναι 
χρή, μηδαμῶς ἔκχυσιν ἀλλὰ τάσιν καὶ πρὸς 
τὰ ἀπαντῶντα κωλύματα μὴ βίαιον μηδὲ ῥαγ- 
δαίαν τὴν ἐπέρεισιν ποιεῖσθαι" μηδὲ μὴν κατα- 
πίπτειν, ἀλλὰ ἵστασθαι καὶ ἐπιλάμπειν τὸ 
δεχόμενον. αὐτὸ γὰρ ἑαυτὸ στερήσει τῆς αὐγῆς 
τὸ μὴ παραπέμπον αὐτήν. 

νη. ὋὉ τὸν θάνατον φοβούμενος ἤτοι ἀναισθ- 
ησίαν φοβεῖται ἢ αἴσθησιν ἑτεροίαν. ἀλλ᾽ 
εἴτε οὐκέτι αἴσθησιν οὐδὲ κακοῦ τινος αἰσθήσῃ: 
εἴτε ἀλλοιοτέραν αἴσθησιν κτήσῃ, ἀλλοῖον ζῷον 
ἔσῃ καὶ τοῦ ζῆν οὐ παύση. 

νθ΄. Οἱ ἄνθρωποι γεγόνασιν ἀλλήλων ἕνεκεν. 
ἢ δίδασκε οὖν ἢ φέρε. 

ξ. Ἄλλως βέλος, ἄλλως νοῦς φέρεται" ὑ 
μέντοι νοῦς, καὶ ὅταν εὐλαβῆται καὶ ὅταν περὶ 
τὴν σκέψιν στρέφηται, φέρεται κατ᾽ εὐθὺ οὐδὲν 
ἧττον καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ προκείμενον. 

Ea’. Εἰσιέναι εἰς τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν ἑκάστου" 
παρέχειν δὲ καὶ ἑτέρῳ παντὶ εἰσιέναι εἰς τὸ 
ἑαυτοῦ ἡγεμονικὸν. 


-- 


1 τπείνεται Cor for γίνετσι 2 διερείδετοι Reiske + διαιρεῖται PA. 





1 A false etymology. The derivation may be from ἀΐσσω 
or ἄγνυμι 
228 


BOOK VIII 


rate the beams of the Sun are called Extension rays, 
because they have an ertexsion in space.) And what a 
ray is you may easily see, if you observe the sun's 
light entering through a narrow chink ito a 
darkened room, for it extends straight on, and is 
as it were brought up against? anv solid body it 
encounters that cuts off the air beyond. There 
the ray comes to a standstill, neither slipping off nor 
sinking down. Such then should be the diffusion 
and circumfusion of the mind, never a diflusmg away 
but extension, and it should never make a violent 
or uncontrollable impact against any obstacle it 
meets with, no, nor collapse, but stand firm and illu- 
minate what receives it. For that which conducts 
it not on its way will deprive rself wilfully of its 
beams. 

58. Dread of death is a dread of non-sensation 
or new sensation.*? But either thou wilt feel 
sensation, and so no sensation of any evil; or a 
different ‘kind of sensation will be thine, and so the 
life of a different creature, but still ἃ life. 

59. Mankind hase been created for the sake of 
one another.t Enther instruct therefore or endure.’ 

60. One is the way of an arrow, another of the 
mind. Howbeit the mind, both when it cautiously 
examines its ground and when it is engaged in its 
enquiry, is none the less moving straight forward and 
towards its goal. 

61. Enter into every man’s ruling Reason, and 
give every one else an opportunity to enter into 
thine.® 

2 διαιρεῖται (mss.) would mean apparently eut or broken 

Sep Justin, Apol. 1. ὃ 57. addressed to Pius and Marcus 

tax Lad init ὅν 282: ix LIL. 


bay. 38. cp. vu. 553 Epict. ur. 9, § 12. 
229 


bo 


BIBAION © 


ω Lal “ \ ‘al δ, 
α΄. Ὁ ἀδικῶν ἀσεβεῖ. τῆς γὰρ τῶν ὅλων φύσεως 
, \ \ An Ψ > / 
KATETKEVAKULAS TA λογικὰ ζῷα ἕνεκεν ἀλλήλων, 
n [4 
ὥστε ὠφελεῖν μὲν ἄλληλα κατ᾽ ἀξίαν, βλάπτειν 
a e \ / / / 
δὲ μηδαμῶς, ὁ τὸ βούλημα ταύτης παραβαίνων 
a) / > \ A 
ἀσεβεῖ δηλονότι εἰς τὴν πρεσβυτάτην τῶν 
θεῶν. 
e ΄ \ > a“ 
Kal ὁ ψευδόμενος δὲ ἀσεβεῖ περὶ τὴν αὐτὴν 
, ς \ “ Ὁ / "7 3 \ / 
θεόν. ἡ yap τῶν ὅλων φύσις ὄντων ἐστὶ φύσις. 
) \ \ / / 
Ta δέ γε ὄντα πρὸς τὰ ὑπάρχοντα πάντα οἰκείως 
»» ov \ 1 3A 2 Ν ἢ / \ 
ἔχει. ἔτι δὲ καὶ ἀλήθεια αὕτη ὀνομάξεται Kai 
Taal Ἂ ? 

TOV ἀληθῶν ἁπάντων πρώτη αἰτία ἐστίν. ὁ μὲν 
cy ¢ \ / 3 A , ») nn 
οὗν ἑκὼν ψευδόμενος ἀσεβεῖ, καθόσον ἐξαπατῶν 

a τ \ / / lay a a“ 
ἀδικεῖ: ὁ δὲ ἄκων, καθόσον διαφωνεῖ TH τῶν 
͵7ὔ \ , an n 

ὅλων φύσει, καὶ καθόσον ἀκοσμεῖ μαχόμενος TH 

fe) 7 7 
τοῦ κόσμου φύσει' μάχεται γὰρ ὁ ἐπὶ τἀναντία 

a“ / t 3 / 
τοῖς ἀληθέσι φερόμενος Tap ἑαυτόν: ἀφορμὰς yap 
προειλήφει παρὰ τῆς φύσεως, ὧν ἀμελήσας οὐχ 
ΦΡ “A / a ω 
olos τέ ἐστι νῦν διακρίνειν τὰ ψευδῆ ἀπὸ τῶν 
ἀληθῶν. 

¢ \ , 

Kai μὴν ὁ τὰς ἡδονὰς ὡς ἀγαθὰ διώκων τοὺς 
\ / Ν / a“ 
δὲ πόνους ὡς κακὰ φεύγων ἀσεβεῖ, ἀνάγκη 


230 


BOOK Ix 


1. Insusrice is impiety. For in that the Nature 
of the Universe has fashioned rational creatures for 
the sake of one another! with a view to mutual 
benefit based upon worth, but by no means for harm, 
the transgressor of her will acts with obvious impiety 
against the most venerable of Derties. 

And the liar too acts impiously with respect to 
the same Goddess. For the Nature of the Universe 
is the Nature of the things that are. And the things 
that are have an intimate connexion with all the 
things that have ever been, Moreover this Nature 
is named Truth, and 1s the primary cause of all that 
is true. The willing liar then is impious in so far 
as his deceit is a wrong-doing; and the unwilling 
liar too, for he is out of tune with the Nature of the 
Whole, and an element of disorder by being in conflict 
with the Nature of an orderly Universe ; for he is in 
conflict who allows himself, as far as his conduct goes, 
to be carried into opposition to what is true. And 
whereas he had previously been endowed by nature 
with the means of distinguishing false from true, by 
neglecting to use them he has lost the power. 

Again he acts impiously who seeks after pleasure 
aS a “good thing and eschews pain as an evil. For 


ν, 80; vil. 59, ae A 5 Ὡ, 


231 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


\ A ral / / “ ~ 
yap τὸν τοιοῦτον μέμφεσθαι πολλάκις TH κοινῇ 
/ , a , 
φύσει, ὡς παρ᾽ ἀξίαν τι ἀπονεμούσῃ τοῖς φαύλοις 
» Ν 
καὶ τοῖς σπουδαίοις, διὰ τὸ πολλάκις τοὺς μὲν 
va > \ \ 
φαύλους ἐν ἡδοναῖς εἶναι Kal τὰ ποιητικὰ τούτων 
ω 7 , a“ 
κτᾶσθαι, τοὺς δὲ σπουδαίους πόνῳ καὶ τοῖς 
mK ΄ ’ e 
ποιητικοῖς τούτου περιπίπτειν. ἔτι δὲ ὁ φοβού- 
7 7 n 
μενος τοὺς πόνους, φοβηθήσεταί ποτε καὶ τῶν 
a / “ \ 3 
ἐσομένων τι ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ" τοῦτο δὲ ἤδη ἀσεβές. 
vd , \ e \ 3 3 7 a 3 ra) 
ὅ τε διώκων τὰς ἡδονὰς οὐκ ἀφέξεται τοῦ ἀδικεῖν' 
“ “ f 
τοῦτο δὲ ἐναργῶς ἀσεβές. 
r  \ / \ aA ¢ \ / 9. 1 2 > 
Χρὴ δέ, πρὸς ἃ ἡ κοινὴ φύσις ἐπίσης ἔχει (οὐ 
ν᾿ 3 ’ 7 \ Ν 
γὰρ ἂν ἀμφότερα ἐποίει, εἰ μὴ πρὸς ἀμφότερα 
> \ “A \ \ Ἂ 
ἐπίσης εἶχε), πρὸς ταῦτα καὶ τοὺς τῇ φύσει 
/ ¢ 
βουλομένους ἕπεσθαι ὁμογνώμονας ὄντας ἐπίσης 
A , ἣν Ν / δ 
διακεῖσθαι; ὅστις οὖν πρὸς πόνον καὶ ἡδονὴν ἢ 
, \ \ x / \ > / @ 
θάνατον καὶ ζωὴν ἢ δόξαν καὶ ἀδοξίαν, οἷς 
“a δ ΄ \ 
ἐπίσης ἡ τῶν ὅλων φύσις χρῆται, αὐτὸς οὐκ 
> γ v a ς > A / \ \ 
ἐπίσης ἔχει, δῆλον ὡς ἀσεβεῖ. λέγω δὲ τὸ 
Ἂ ,, \ 
χρῆσθαι τούτοις ἐπίσης THY κοινὴν φύσιν, ἀντὶ 
fal ,ὔ a“ la 
τοῦ πάντα συμβαίνειν ἐπίσης κατὰ τὸ ἑξῆς τοῖς 
γινομένοις καὶ ἐπιγινομένοις ὁρμῇ τινι ἀρχαίᾳ τῆς 
Ἂ ul 
προνοίας, καθ᾽ ἣν ἀπό τινος ἀρχῆς ὥρμησεν ἐπὶ 
, \ ,ὔ a) / / 
τήνδε τὴν διακόσμησιν συλλαβοῦσά τινας λόγους 
a / 
TOV ἐσομένων καὶ δυνάμεις γονίμους ἀφορίσασα 
ὑποστάσεών τε καὶ μεταβολῶν καὶ διαδοχῶν 
“τοιούτων. 
} 7 \ > 3 \ ld 
β΄. Χαριεστέρου μὲν ἣν ἀνδρὸς ἄγευστον 
“ - ~ 
ψευδολογίας καὶ πάσης ὑποκρίσεως Kal τρυφῆς 


1 ποῦ κατὰ τὸ P: em. Schenk]. 


232 


BOOK IX 


such a man must inevitably find frequent fault with 
the Universal Nature! as unfair in its apportion- 
ments to the worthless and the worthy, since the 
worthless are often lapped in pleasures avd possess 
the things that make for pleasure, while the worthy 
meet with pain and the things that make for pain. 
Moreover he that dreads pain will some day be in 
dread of something that must be in the world. 
And there we have impiety at once. And he that 
hunts after pleasures will not hold his hand from 
injustice. And this is palpable impiety. 

But those, who are of one mind with Nature and 
would walk in her wavs, must hold a neutral attitude - 
towards those things towards which the Universal 
Nature 15 neutral—for she would not be the Maker of 
both were she not neutral towards buth. So he clearly 
acts with impiety who is not himself neutral towards 
pain and pleasure, death and hte, good 1eport and 
ill report, things which the Nature of the Universe 
treats with neutrality. And by the Universal 
Nature treating these with neutrality I mean that all 
things happen. neutrally in a chain of sequence® to 
things that come into being and their after products* 
by some primeval impulse of Providence,’ in accord- 
ance with which She was umpelled by some prinal 
impulse to this making of an ordered Universe, when 
She had conceived certain principles for all that was 
to be, and allocated the powers generative of sub- 
stances and changes and successions such as we see. 

It were more graceful doubtless for a man to 
depart from mankind untainted with falsehood and 


lv). lad jin 41. ep Epict. 1 6, § 39. 


2 Or, attitude of difference. 3 yin. 75. 
4 Or, that are consequent upon some primcral impure, 
Providence here = κοινὴ φύσις. Pa 25 


233 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


καὶ τύφου γενόμενον ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἀπελθεῖν: τὸ 
δ᾽ οὖν κορεσθέντα γε τούτων ἀποπνεῦσαι ‘ δεύτ- 
Epos πλοῦς. ἢ προήρησαι προσκαθῆσθαι τῇ 
κακίᾳ, καὶ οὔπω σε οὐδὲ ἡ πεῖρα πείθει φεύγειν 
ἐκ τοῦ λοιμοῦ; λοιμὸς γὰρ διαφθορὰ διανοίας 
πολλῷ γε μᾶλλον ἤπερ ἡ τοῦ περικεχυμένου 
τούτου πνεύματος τοιάδε TUS δυσκρασία καὶ 
τροπή. αὕτη μὲν γὰρ ἕῴων λοιμός, καθὸ ξῷά 
ἐστιν: ἐκείνη δὲ ἀνθρώπων, καθὸ ἄνθρωποί 
εἰσιν. 

Υ. Μὴ καταφρόνει θανάτου, ἀχλὰ εὐαρέστει 
αὐτῷ ὡς καὶ τούτου ἑνὸς ὄντος, ὧν ἡ φύσις 
ἐθέλει. οἷον γώρ ἐστι τὸ νεάσαι, καὶ τὸ γηρᾶσαι, 
καὶ τὸ αὐξῆσαι, καὶ τὸ ἀκμάσαι, καὶ ὀδόντας 
καὶ γένειον καὶ πολιὰς ἐνεγκεῖν, καὶ σπεῖραι, 
καὶ κυοφορῆσαι, καὶ ἀποκυῆσαι, καὶ τὰ ἄλλα 
τὰ φυσικὰ ἐνεργήματα, ὅσα αἱ τοῦ σοῦ βίου 
ὧραι φέρουσι, τοιοῦτο καὶ τὸ διαλυθῆναι. 
τοῦτο μὲν οὖν κατὰ ἄνθρωπόν ἐστι λελογισ μένον, 
μὴ ὁλοσχερῶς μηδὲ ὠστικῶς μηδὲ ὑπερηφάνως 
πρὸς τὸν θάνατον ἔχειν, ἀλλὰ περιμένειν ὡς 
μίαν τῶν φυσικῶν ἐνεργειῶν. καὶ ὡς νῦν 
περιμένεις, πότε ἔμβρυον ἐκ τῆς γαστρὸς “τῆς 
γυναικός σου ἐξέλθῃ, οὕτως ἐκδέχεσθαι τὴν ὥραν 
ἐν ἢ τὸ ψυχάριόν cov τοῦ ἐλύτρου τούτου 
ἐκπεσεῖται. 

Ei δὲ καὶ ἰδιωτικὸν παράπηγμα ἁψικάρδιον 
ἐθέλεις, μάλιστά σε εὔκολον πρὸς τὸν θάνατον 
ποιήσει ἡ ἐπίστασις ἡ ἐπὶ τὰ ὑποκείμενα, ὧν 
μέλλεις ἀφίστασθαι, καὶ μεθ᾽ οἵων ἠθῶν οὐκέτι 





1 But ον. Capit xxvin. § 4 (of Mareus): mortem coutem- 
NENS. 2 x. 36, 8 9, 


234 


BOOK IX 


all dissimulation and luxury and arrogance ,- failing 
that, however, the ‘next best course’ is to breathe 
out his life when his gorge has risen at these things. 
Or is it thy choice to throw in thy lot with vice, 
and does not even thy taste of it yet persuade thee 
to fly from the pestilence? For the corruption of the 
mind is a pest far worse than any such miasma and 
vitiation of the air which we breathe around us. 
The latter is a pestilence for living creatures and 
affects their life, the former for human beings and 
affects their humanity. 

3. Despise not death,} but welcome it, for Nature 
wills it hke all else. For dissolution is but one of 
the processes of Nature,* associated with thy life’s 
various seasons, such as to be young, to be old, to 
wax to our prime and to reach it, to grow teeth and 
beard and gray hairs, to beget, conceive and bring 
forth. A man then that has reasoned the matter 
out should not take up towards death the attitude of 
indifference, reluctance, or scorn, but await it as one 
of the processes of Nature.’ Look for the hour 
when thy soul shall emerge from this its sheath, as 
now thou awaitest the moment when the child she 
carries shall come forth from thy wife’s womb. 

But if thou desirest a commonplace solace too that 
will appeal to the heart, nothing will enable thee to 
meet death with equanimity better than to observe 
the environment thou art leaving and the sort of 
characters with whom thy soul shall no longer be 

ὁ ep. Montaigne i. 19 (Florio’s version): ‘‘ The same way 
you came from death to life, returne without passion or 
amazement from life to death. Your death 1s but a piece of 
the world’s order, and but a parcel of the world’s hte.” 


4 Hardly a personal touch, as Vibia Aurela, Faustina’s 
last child, was born in 166, Besides, ἔμβρυον has no article 


2350 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἔσται ἡ «σὴ ψυχὴν συμπεφυρμένη. προσ κόπτ- 
εσθαι μὲν γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἥκιστα δεῖ, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
κήδεσθαι καὶ πράως φέρειν, μεμνῆσθαι μέντοι, 
ὅτι οὐκ ἀπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων ὁμοδογματούντων σοι ἡ 
ἀπαλλαγὴ ἔσται. τοῦτο yap μόνον, εἴπερ ἄρα, 
ἀνθεῖλκεν ἂν καὶ “κατεῖχεν ἐν τῷ ζῆν, εἰ συζῆν 
ἐφεῖτο τοῖς τὰ αὐτὰ δόγματα περιπεποιημένοις. 
νῦν δὲ ὁρᾷς, ὅσος ὁ κόπος ἐν τῇ διαφωνίᾳ 
τῆς συμβιώσεως, ὥστε εἰπεῖν, $f Θᾶττον ἔλθοις, 
ὦ θάνατε, μὴ που καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπιλάθωμαι 
ἐμαυτοῦ." 

δ, ὋὉ ἁμαρτάνων ἑαυτῷ ἁμαρτάνει" ὁ ἀδικῶν 
ἑαυτὸν ἀδικεῖ κακὸν ἑαυτὸν ποιῶν. 

ε. ᾿Αδικεῖ πολλάκις ὁ μὴ ποιῶν τι, οὐ μόνον 
ὁ ποιῶν τι. 

ς΄, ᾿Αρκεῖ ἡ παροῦσα ὑπόληψις καταληπτική, 
καὶ ἡ παροῦσα πρᾶξις κοινωνική, καὶ ἡ παροῦσα 
διάθεσις εὐαρεστικὴ πρὸς πᾶν τὸ παρὰ τῆς ἐκτὸς : 
αἰτίας συμβαῖνον. 

ae ᾿Εξαλεῖψαι φαντασίαν' “στῆσαι ὁρμήν' 
σβέσαι ὄρεξιν' ἐφ᾿ ἑαυτῷ ἔχειν. τὸ ἡγεμονικόν. 
η΄. Εἰς μὲν τὰ ἄλογα ζῷα μία ψυχὴ διήρηται" 
εἰς δὲ τὰ "λογικὰ μία νοερὰ “ψυχὴ μεμέρισται. 
ὥσπερ καὶ μία γῆ ἐστὶν ἁπάντων τῶν γεωδῶν, 


ἀδικεῖ Cor.: κακοῖ PV: ἑαυτὸν κακὸν Leop. 
τὸ ἐκ τῆς PAD: τῆς ἐκτὸς Reiske (ep. 1x. 31). 


1 xy, 36; Plato, Phaed. 66 x. 

? As Marcus himself often was cp. v. 10; vi. 12; viii. 8 

δ x, 4. 

* ep. the despairing echo of these words by General Gordon, 
who was a reader of Marcus, from Khartum: ‘ There is 
nothing left for me to prevent me speaking evil of everyone 
and distr usting my dear Lord but death.” 


236 





BOOK IX 


inixed up.) For wlule it is very far from right 
to be disgusted with them,- but rather even to 
befriend and deal gently with them. yet it is well 
to remember that not from men of lke principles 
with thine will thy release be. For this alone, if 
anything, could draw us back and bind us to life, 
if it were but permitted us to live with those who 
have possessed themselves of the same principles as 
ours. But now thou seest how thou art driven by 
sheer weariness at the jarring discord of thy life with 
them to say: Turry noi, Ὁ Death, lest peradventure | 
too forget mysel/.4 

4, He that does wrong, doves wreng to himselt.° 
The unjust man is unjust to himself, for he makes 
himself bad.° 

5. There is often an injustice of omission as well as 
of commission. 

6. The present assumption nghtly apprehended, 
the present act socially enacted, the present dis- 
position satisfied with all that befalls it from the 
Cause external to it--these will suffice. 

7. Efface imagination.? Restrain impulse Quench 
desire. Keep the ruling Reason in thine own 
power. 

S. Among irrational creatures one life is distributed, 
and among the rational one intellectual soul has 
been parcelled out. Just as also there is one 
earth for all the things that are of the earth; and 


Sav. 26; 1x 38. Epict. ἃ, 10, § 26. 

8 Or, does himself harm. Plutarch (Stoic. Contrad. 12) 
shews that Chrysippus contradicts himself on this point. 
Justin (Apol. i. 3), speaking of persecution to Pius and 
Marcus, turns the tables on the latter, saying that τῇ injuring 
innocent Christians they injured themselves. Epict. iv. 5. 10. 

7 vii. 29; vili. 29, 49; xu. 25 


237 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


\ ee N \ ΑΥ̓͂ “ \ Ψ γ.3ἃ,. » ,Ζ 
καὶ ἐννι φωτὶ ορῶμεν, καὶ EVA ἀέρα «ναπνξέομεν, 
ὅσα ὁρατικὰ καὶ ἔμψυχα πάντα. 
n \ 
θ΄. “Ὅσα κοινοῦ τινος μετέχει, πρὸς τὸ 
ὁμογενὲς σπεύδει. τὸ γεῶδες πᾶν ῥέπει ἐπὶ 
wn ἈΝ a 7 Ν Ἂ e 7 
γῆν, τὸ ὑγρὸν πᾶν σύρρουν, τὸ ἀερῶδες ὁμοίως" 
a , ’ Ν A 
ὥστε χρήζειν τῶν διειργόντων Kai Bias. τὸ πῦρ 
\ ἈΝ Ν n “ 
ἀνωφερὲς μὲν διὰ TO στοιχειῶδες πῦρ' παντὶ δὲ 
a \ 
πυρὶ ἐνταῦθα πρὸς τὸ συνεξάπτεσθαι ἕτοιμον 
e¢ a \ a Ν ξ Ν Ν 3 / f 
οὕτως, ὥστε καὶ πᾶν TO ὑλικὸν TO ὀλίγῳ ἕξηρό- 
3 a 
τερον εὐέξαπτον εἶναι, διὰ TO ἔλαττον ἐγκεκρᾶσθαι 
a \ \ ) / 
αὐτῷ TO κωλυτικὸν πρὸς ἔξαψιν. Kal τοίνυν 
a) \ A \ a ΄ ’, 
πᾶν τὸ κοινῆς [μὲν] νοερᾶς φύσεως μέτοχον 
\ e , 7 τ a 
πρὸς TO συγγενὲς ὁμοίως σπεύδει ἢ καὶ μᾶλλον. 
a \ fr 4 
ὅσῳ γάρ ἐστι κρεῖττον παρὰ τὰ ἄλλα, τοσούτῳ 
\ \ \ a a / 
Kal πρὸς TO συγκιρνᾶσθαι τῷ οἰκείῳ Kal συγ- 
lal “ 
χεῖσθαι ἑτοιμότερον. 
3 \ “ 5. Ν \ “ γ “ re 4 f 
Εὐθὺς γοῦν ἐπὶ μὲν τῶν ἀλόγων εὑρέθη σμήνη 
Ν 
καὶ ἀγέλαι καὶ νεοσσοτροφίαι καὶ οἷον ἔρωτες" 
\ \ 3 ἴω Ν 
ψυχαὶ γὰρ ἤδη ἦσαν ἐνταῦθα, καὶ τὸ συνωγωγὸν 
? t 
ἐν τῷ κρείττονι ἐπιτεινόμενον εὑρίσκετο, οἷον 
3} 5 Ν ἴω 4 MA 2 \ / x , 
οὔτε ἐπὶ φυτῶν ἣν οὔτε ἐπὶ λίθων ἢ ξύλων. 
ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν λογικῶν ἕῴων πολιτεῖαι καὶ φιλίαι 
\ > \ / \ 3 / ~ 
καὶ οἶκοι καὶ σύλλογοι Kal ἐν πολέμοις συνθῆκαι 
/ an / 
καὶ avoyal. ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν ἔτι κρειττόνων, καὶ 
ἐ ῇ ΄ 
διεστηκότων τρόπον τινὰ ἕνωσις ὑπέστη, οἵα ἐπὶ 
fa) “ \ 
τῶν ἄστρων. οὕτως ἡ ἐπὶ TO κρεῖττον ἐπανά- 
βασις, συμπάθειαν καὶ ἐν διεστῶσιν ἐργάσασθαι 
δύναται. 


1 omit P. 


238 


BOOK IX 


one is the light whereby we see,! and one the air 
we all breathe that have sight and life. 

9. All that share in a common element have an 
affinity for their own kind. The trend of all that is 
earthy is to earth; fluids all run together; 16 15 the same 
with the aerial; so that only interposing obstacles 
and force can keep them apart. Fire indeed has a 
tendency to rise by reason of the elemental fire, but 
is so quick to be kindled in sympathy with all fire 
here below that every sort of matter, a whit drier 
than usual, is easily kindled owing to its having tewer 
constituents calculated to offer resistance to its 
kindhng. So then all that shares in the Universal 
Intelligent Nature has ag strong an aftlinity towards 
what is akin, aye even a stronger. For the measure 
of its superiority to all other things is the measure of 
its readiness to blend and coalesce with that which is 
akin to it. 

At any rate to begin with among irrational 
creatures we find swarms and herds and_bird- 
colonies and, as it were, love-associations.? For 
already at that stage there are souls, and the bond 
of affinity shews itself in the higher form to a 
degree of mtensity not found in plants or stones 
or timber. But among rational creatures are found 
political communities and friendships and house- 
holds and gatherings and in wars treaties and 
armistices. But in things still higher a sort of unity 
in separation even exists, as in the stars. Thus 
the ascent to the higher form is able to effect a 
sympathetic connexion? even among things which 
are separate. 


1 ΧΗ, 30. 2 ep. Aesch. Prom, Vin. 492 στέργηθρα. 
® cp. Epict. i. 14 ad inet. 


239 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ὅρα οὖν τὸ νῦν γινόμενον: μόνα yap τὰ νοερὰ 
νῦν ἐπιλέλησται τῆς πρὸς ἄλληλα σπουδῆς καὶ 
συννεύσεως, καὶ τὸ σύρρουν ὧδε μόνον οὐ βλέπ- 
εται. ἀλλ᾽ ὅμως καίτοι φεύγοντες περικαταλαμ- 
βάνονται' κρωτεῖ γὰρ ἡ φύσις. ὄψει δέ, ὃ λέγω, 
παραφυλάσσων. θᾶσσον γοῦν εὕροι τις ἂν 
γεῶδές TL μηδενὸς γεώδους προσαπτόμενον ἤπερ 
ἄνθρωπον ἀνθρώπου ἀ ἀπεσχισμένον. 

te. Φέρει καρπὸν καὶ ἄνθρωπος καὶ θεὸς καὶ 
ὁ κόσμος" ἐν ταῖς οἰκείαις ὥραις ἕκαστα φέρει. 
εἰ δὲ ἡ συνήθεια κυρίως τέτριφεν ἐπὶ ἀμπέλου 
καὶ τῶν ὁμοίων, οὐδὲν τοῦτο. ὁ λόγος δὲ καὶ 
κοινὸν καὶ ἴδιον καρπὸν ἔχει: καὶ γίνεται ἐξ 
αὐτοῦ τοιαῦθ᾽ ἕτερα, ὁποῖόν τι αὐτός ἐστιν ὁ 
λόγος. 

ια΄. Ἐπ μὲν δύνασαι, μεταδίδασκε' εἰ δὲ μή, 
μέμνησο, ὅτι πρὸς τοῦτο ἡ εὐμένειά σοι δέδοται. 
καὶ οἱ θεοὶ δὲ εὐμενεῖς τοῖς τοιούτοις εἰσίν" εἰς 
ἔνια δὲ καὶ συνεργοῦσιν, εἰς ὑγίειαν, εἰς πλοῦτον, 
εἰς δόξαν" οὕτως εἰσὶ χρηστοί. ἔξεστι δὲ καὶ 
σοί: ἢ εἰστέ, τίς ὃ κωλύων; 

ιβ΄. lover, μὴ ὡς ἄθλιος μηδὲ ὡς ἐλεεῖσθαι 
ἢ θαυμάξεσθαι θέλων: ἀλλὰ μόνον ὃν θέλε, 
κινεῖσθαι καὶ ἴσχεσθαι, ὡς ὁ πολιτικὸς λόγος 
ἀξιοῖ. 

ιγ΄. Σήμερον ἐξῆλθον πάσης περιστάσεως" 
μᾶλλον δὲ ἐξέβαλον πᾶσαν περίστασιν' ἔξω γὰρ 
οὐκ ἦν, ἀλλὰ ἔνδον ἐν ταῖς ὑπολήψεσι. 


1 St. Paul, Gal. ν. 22. 2 v, 98 ; viii. 59. 2 χ 07, 
ὌΝ ΟΣ wat. 40 0 χῆν 22. δ, Montaigne, i. 40 (Florio’s 
version): ‘‘Men, saith an ancient Greek sentence, are 


tormented by the opinions they have of things and not the 
240 


BOOK IX 


See then what actually happens at the present 
time ; for at the present time it is only the intelli- 
gent creatures that have forgotten their mutual 
alfinity and attraction, and here alone there is no 
sign of hke flowing to lke. Yet flee as they will, 
they are nevericless eaught in the toils, for Nature 
will have her way. Watch closely and thou wilt see 
‘tis so. Easier at any rate were it to find an earthy 
thing in touch with nothing earthy than a man 
wholly severed from mankind. 

10. They all bear fruit—Man and God and the 
Universe : each in its due season bears. [Ὁ matters 
nought that m customary parlance such a term is 
strictly xpplicable only to the vine and such things. 
Reason too hath its fruit both for all and for itself, 
and there issue from it other things such as is 
Reason itself.? 

11. If thou art able, convert the wrong-doer.? If 
not, bear in mind that kindliness was given thee to 
meet just such a case. The Gods too are kindly to 
such persons and even co-operate with them for 
certain ends—for health, to wit, and wealth and 
fame, so benignant are they.? Thou too canst be the 
same; or say who is there that prevents thee. 

12. Do thy work not as a drudge, nor as desirous 
of pity or praise. Desire one thing only, to act or 
not to act as civic reason directs. 

13. This day have I got me out of all trouble, or 
rather have cast out all trouble, for it was not from 
without, but within, in my own imagination.* 
things themselves . If evil have no entrance into us but 
by our judgment, 1t seemeth that it heth m our power either 
to contemne or turn them Το our good.... If that which we 


call evil and torment be neither ‘torment nor evil. but that 
our fancy only gives it that quality, it is im us to change 16.” 


241 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


wo. Πάντα ταῦτα συνήθη μὲν τῇ πείρᾳ, 
ἐφήμερα, δὲ τῷ “χρόνῳ, ῥυπαρὰ δὲ τῇ ὕλη. 
πάντα νῦν, οἷα én ἐκείνων, ODS κατεθάψαμεν. 

we. Ta πρώγματα ἔξω θυρῶι, ἕστηκεν αὐτὰ 
ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῶν μηδὲν μήτε εἰδότα περὶ αὑτῶν μήτε 
ἀποφαινόμενα. τί οὖν ἀποφαίνεται περὶ αὐτῶν; 
τὸ ἡγεμονικόν. 

i’, Οὐκ ἐν πείσει, ἀλλ᾽ ἐνεργείᾳ. τὸ τοῦ 
λογικοῦ «καὶ; πολιτικοῦ ζῴου κακὸν καὶ ἀγαθόν, 
ὥσπερ οὐδὲ ὴ ἀρετὴ καὶ κακία αὐτοῦ ἐν πείσει, 
ἀλλὰ ἐνεργείᾳ. 

ιζ΄. Τῷ ἀναρριφέντι λίθῳ οὐδὲν κακὸν τὸ 
κατενεχθῆναι οὐδὲ ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἀνενεχθῆναι. 

νη΄. Δίελθε ἔσω εἰς τὰ ἡγεμονικὰ αὐτῶν, καὶ 
ὄψει, τίνας κριτὰς φοβῇ, οἵους καὶ περὶ αὑτῶν 
ὄντας κριτάς. 

ιθ. Ἰϊάντα ἐν μεταβολῇ: καὶ αὐτὸς σὺ ἐν 
διηνεκεῖ ἀλλοιώσει καὶ κατά τι φθορᾷ καὶ ὁ 
κόσμος δὲ ὅλος. 
κ΄. Τὸ ἄλλου ἁμάρτημα ἐκεῖ δεῖ καταλιπεῖν. 

κα΄. ᾿Βνεργείας ἀπόληξις, ὁρμῆς, ὑπολήψεως 
παῦλα καὶ οἷον θάνατος, οὐδὲν κακόν. per 
yoy ἐπὶ ἡλικίαν, οἷον τὴν παιδικήν, τὴν τοῦ 
μειρακίου, τὴν νεότητα, τὸ γῆρας" καὶ yap τού- 
των πᾶσα μεταβολὴ θάνωτος. μήτι δεινόν; 
μέτιθι νῦν ἐπὶ βίον τὸν ὑπὸ τῷ πάππῳ, εἶτα τὸν 
ὑπὸ τῇ μητρί, εἶτα τὸν ὑπὸ τῷ πατρί" καὶ ἄλλας 

1 δρμῆς requives a substantive hke ἀπόληψις or ἧἡσυχὴ to 
balance the sentence 


----- -- τ τ’ ττιὔὐὔ--.--.-.....-..... .. ......------.--.... .ὕ.ὕ..ὕβ..ς-..---- 


liv. 44, ὄν, 85, 
3.4: 1v. 32 * vin 20) 


242 


BOOK IX 


14. All these are things of familiar experience !; 
in thew duration ephemeral,? in their material foul. 
Everything is now as ib was in the days ot those 
whom we have buried.? 

15. Objective things stand outside the docr, keep- 
ing themselves to themselves, without knowledge of 
or message about themselves. What then has for us 
a message about them? The ruling Reason. 

16. Not in being acted upon but in activity lies 
the evil and the good of the rational and civic 
creature, just as his virtue too and his vice le in 
activity and not in being acted upon. 

17. The stone that is thrown into the air is none 
the worse for falling down, or the better for being 
carried upwards.+ 

18. Find the way within into their ruling Reason, 
and thou shalt see what these judges are whom thou 
fearest and what their judgment of themselves 15 
worth.® 

19. Change is the universal experience.” LPhou 
art thyself undergoing a perpetual transforiualion 
and, in some sort, decay’: aye and the whole Uni- 
verse as well. 

20. Another's wrong-doing should be left with 
him.§ 

91. A cessation of activity, a quiescence from 
impulse and opimion and, as it were, their death, is no 
evil. ‘Turn now to consider the stages of thy lite— 
childhood, boyhood, manhood, old age—each step 
in the ladder of change a death. Is there anything 
terrible here? Pass on now to thy hfe under thy 
grandfather, then under thy mother, then under thy 

>av. 383 vu dd. Boge Se vin TS. 
7ν Bad fin τ vu 25 S yi, 29; 1x. 58 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


\ \ \ 
δὲ πολλὴς Stadopas! καὶ μεταβολὰς καὶ ἀπο- 


λήξεις εὑρίσκων, ἐπερώτα σεαυτόν" “Μήτι 
δεινόν; οὕτως τοίνυν οὐδὲ ἡ τοῦ ὅλου βίου 
λῆξις καὶ παῦλα καὶ μεταβολή. 

κβ΄. Tpéxe é ἐπὶ τὸ σεαυτοῦ ἡγεμονικὸν καὶ τὸ 
τοῦ ὅλου, καὶ τὸ τούτου. τὸ μὲν σεαυτοῦ, ἵνα 
νοῦν" δικαϊ κὸν αὐτὸ ποιήσῃς" τὸ δὲ τοῦ ὅλου, 
iva συμμνημονεύσης, τίνος μέρος εἶ" τὸ δὲ τούτου, 
ἵνα ἐπιστήσης, πότερον ἄγνοια ἢ γνώμη, καὶ 
ἅμα λογίσῃ, ὅτι συγγενές. 

κγ΄. “Ὥσπερ αὐτὸς σὺ πολιτικοῦ συστήματος 
συμπληρωτικὸς εἰ, οὕτως καὶ πᾶσα πρᾶξίς σου 
συμπληρωτικὴ ἔστω ζωῆς πολιτικῆς. ἥτις ἐὰν 
οὖν πρᾶξίς gov μὴ ἔχῃ τὴν ἀναφορὰν εἴτε 
προσεχῶς εἴτε πόρρωθεν ἐπὶ τὸ κοινωνικὸν 
τέλος, αὕτη διασπᾷ τὸν βίον καὶ οὐκ ἐᾷ ἕνα 
εἶναι καὶ «στασιώδης ἐστίν, ὥσπερ, ἐν δήμῳ ὃ τὸ 
καθ᾽ αὑτὸν μέρος διιστάμενος ἀπὸ τῆς τοιαύτης 
συμφωνίας. 

κδ΄. Παιδίων ὀργαὶ καὶ παίγνια, καὶ “πνευμ- 
άτια νεκροὺς βαστάζοντα,᾽ ὥστε ἐναργέστερον 
προσπεσεῖν τὸ τῆς Νεκυίας. 

we. Wee ἐπὶ τὴν ποιότητα τοῦ αἰτίου, καὶ ἀπὸ 
τοῦ ὑλικοῦ αὐτὸ περιγράψας θέασαι: εἶτα καὶ 
τὸν Χρόνον 7 περιόρισον, ὃ ὅσον πλεῖστον ὑφίστασθαι 
πέφυκε τοῦτο τὸ ἰδίως ποιόν 


1 διαφθορὰς AT). 


2 νῦν Rend.. γοῦν Cor, 


! Pius. See oni 17.83 
“9 Lucan, de Luet. 15 
iV. {1 πνευμάτιον = ψυχάριον. 


244 ; 


BOOK IX 


father,! and finding there many other alterations, 
changes, and cessatious, ask thyself: /s /heie any- 
thing terrible here? No, nor any in the ending and 
quiescence and change of the whvle of Ife.” 

22. Speed to the ruling Reasun of thyself, and of 
the Universe, and of thy neighbour: of thine own, 
that thou mayest make it just; of that of the Uni- 
verse, that thou mayest therewithal remember of 
what thou art a part; of thy neighbour, that thou 
mayest learn whether it was ignorance with him or 
understanding, and reflect at the same time that itis 
akin to thee. 

23. As thou thyself art a parl perfective of a 
civic organism, let also thine every act be a part 
perfective of civic life. Every act of thine then 
that has no relation direct or indirect to this social 
end, tears thy lite asunder and destroys rts unity, and 
creates a schism, just as in a commonwealth does the 
man who, as far as in him hes, stands aloof from 
such a concord of his fellows. 

24. Children’s squabbles and make-beheve, and 
little souls bearing up corpses*—the Invocation of the 
Dead‘ might strike one as a more vivid reality! 

25. Go straight to that which makes a thing what 
it is, 1ts formative cause, and, isvlating it from 
the material, regard it so. ‘Then mark off the 
utmost time for which the individual object so 
qualified is calculated to subsist. 


4 Possibly refers to the Νέκυια of Homer (Od x1.). Meuippus 
(Diog. Laert Afen. 6) also wrote a Nexuea (7). dhore, vi. 47). Bat 
it was a term for the invocation of the dead, see Just. 4p 1 18. 

δ To the Formative, or Efficient Cause, of thinys 1s due not 
only that they exist, but that they are what they are. To 
translate the words here lterally by the quulsty of th. Cuwoe 
conveys no meaning. rp. vi. ὃ. 


245 


bo 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ks. ᾿Ανέτλης μύρια διὰ τὸ μὴ ἀρκεῖσθαι τῷ 
σῷ ἡγεμονικῷ ποιοῦντι ταῦτα, εἰς ἃ κατεσκεύ- 
ασται. ἀλλὰ ἅλις. 

κζ΄. Ὅταν ἄλλος ψέγῃ σε, ἢ μισῇ, ἢ τοιαῦτά 
TLVA ἐκφωνῶσιν, ἔρχου ἐπὶ τὰ ψυχάρια αὐτῶν, 
δίελθε ἔσω καὶ ἴδε, ποῖοί τινές εἰσιν. ὄψει, ὅτι 
οὐ δεῖ σε σπᾶσθαι, t ἵνα τούτοις τί ποτε περὶ σοῦ 
δοκῇ. εὐνοεῖν μέντοι αὐτοῖς δεῖ" φύσει γὰρ φίλοι. 
καὶ οἱ θεοὶ δὲ παντοίως αὐτοῖς βοηθοῦσι, δι᾽ 
ὀνείρων, διὰ μαντειῶν, πρὸς ταῦτα μέντοι, πρὸς ἃ 
ἐκεῖνοι διαφέρονται. 

ky. Tatra ἐστι τὰ τοῦ κόσμου ἐγκύκλια, 
ἄνω κάτω, ἐξ αἰῶνος εἰς αἰῶνα. καὶ ἤτοι ἐφ᾽ 
ἕκαστον ὁρμᾷ ἡ τοῦ ὅλου διάνοια: ὅπερ εἰ ἔστιν, 
ἀποδέχου τὸ ἐκείνης ὁρμητόν" ἢ ἅπαξ ὦ ὥρμησε, τὰ 
δὲ λοιπὰ Kar ἐπακολούθησιν καὶ ὑτί ἐν Tivert + 
τρόπον yap τινα ἄτομοι, Τὴ ἀμερῆ. t τὸ δὲ ὅλον, 
εἴτε θεός, εὖ ἔχει πάντα" εἴτε τὸ εἰκῆ, μὴ καὶ σὺ 
εἰκῇ. 

Ἤδη πάντας ἡμᾶς γῆ καλύψει: ἔπειτα καὶ 
αὐτὴ μεταβαλεῖ" κἀκεῖνα εἰς ἄπειρον μεταβαλεῖ" 
καὶ πάλιν ἐκεῖνα εἰς ἄπειρον. τὰς γὰρ ἐπι- 
κυματώσεις τῶν μεταβολῶν καὶ ἀλλοιώσεων 
ἐνθυμούμενός τις καὶ τὸ τάχος παντὸς θνητοῦ 
καταφρονήσει. 

κθ΄. Χειμάρρους ἡ τῶν ὅλων αἰτία" 3 πάντα 
φέρει. ὡς εὐτελῆ δὲ καὶ τὰ πολιτικὰ ταῦτα Kal, 


ἱ τί ἕν (ἐν A) τίνι Ῥ : τί ἐντείνῃ (Why this striving 5) Cor. 
(ep x. 81): τὶ ἐν τινί Stuch. 2 οὐσία Reiske 


li 17 ad fu 2 ux. 11, 40. 
3. The Heraclitan round of change between the elements ; 
see iv. 46. 4 ux. 1, § 4. 


246 


------- 


BOOK IX 


26. By not being content with thy ruling Reason 
doing the work for which it was constituted, thou 
hast borne unnumbered ls. Nay, ’tis enough! 

27. When men blame or hate thee or give utter- 
ance to some such feelings against thee, turn to their 
souls, enter into them, and see what sort of men they 
are. Thou wilt perceive that thou needest not be 
concerned as to what they think of thee. Yet 
must thou fee] kindly towards them, for Nature made 
them dear to thee. ‘The Gods tuv lend them aid in 
divers ways by dreams! and oracles, to win those 
very things on which their hearts are set.- 

28. The same, upwards, downwards,® trom cycle to 
eyele are the revolutions ot the Umverse. And 
either the Universal Mind feels an impulse to act in 
each separate case—and if this be sv, accept its 
impulsion—or it felt this impulse ¢ once for all, and all 
subsequent things follow by way of consequence ; 
and what matters which αὐ be, for if you like to put 
it so the world 1s all atoms [or indivisible].° But as 
to the Whole, if God—all is well; if haphazard—be 
not thou also haphazard © 

Presently the carth will cover us all. It too will 
anon be changed, and the resulting product will go 
on from change to change, and so for ever and ever. 
When a man thinks of these successive waves of 
change and transformation, and their rapidity, he 
will hold every mortal thing in scorn.’ 

29. The World-Cause is as a torrent, it sweeps 
everything along. How negligible these manikins 

5 Possibly ἀμερῇ 18 a gloss, ΟΥ̓δμοιομερῆ should he read. 
(ep. Epict. #rag. 178.) — 

6 41,5; iv.2, etc. τὸ ὅλον may also be taken to mean in Ane 


71x. 19; xu. 21. ep. Capit. xxvin. 4 of Marcus on his 
death-bed, ridens res humanas. 


247 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ws οἴεται, φιλοσόφως πρακτικὰ ἀνθρώπια' μυξῶν 
μεστά. ἄνθρωπε, τί ποτε; ποίησον, ὃ νῦν ἡ 
φύσις ἀπαιτεῖ. ὅρμησον, ἐὰν διδῶται, καὶ μὴ 
περιβλέπου, εἴ τις εἴσεται. μὴ τὴν Πλάτωνος 
πολιτείαν ἔλπεξε" ἀλλὰ ἀρκοῦ, εἰ τὸ Ὀραχύτατον 
πρόεισι, καὶ τούτου αὐτοῦ τὴν ἔκβασιν, ὡς 
μικρόν τί ἐστι, διανοοῦ. δόγμω γὰρ αὐτῶν τίς 
μεταβάλλει; χωρὶς δὲ δογμάτων μεταβολῆς τί 
ἄλλο ἢ δουλεία στενόντων καὶ πείθεσθαι προσ- 
ποιουμένων; ὕπαγε νῦν, καὶ ᾿Αλέξανδρον καὶ 
Φύλεππον καὶ Δημήτ ριον τὸν Φαληρέα μοι λέγε. 
ὄψονται, εἰ εἶδον, τί ἡ κοινὴ φύσις ἤθελεν, καὶ 
ἑαυτοὺς ἐπαιδαγώγησαν' εἰ δὲ ἐτραγῴδησαν, 
οὐδείς με KATAKEK Lice μιμεῖσθαι. ἁπλοῦν ἐστι 
καὶ αἰδῆμον τὸ φιλοσοφίας ἔργον: μή με ἄπαγε: 
ἐπὶ σεμνοτυφίαν. 

λ΄. ᾿Ανωθεν ἐπιθεωρεῖν ἀγέλας μυρίας καὶ 
τελετὰς μυρίας καὶ πλοῦν παντοῖον ἐν χειμῶσι 
καὶ γαλήναις καὶ διαφορὰς γινομένων, συγγινο- 
μένων, ἀπογινομένων. ἐπινόει δὲ καὶ τὸν ὑπ᾽ 
ἄλλων πάλαι βεβιωμένον βίον, καὶ τὸν μετὰ σὲ 
βιωθησόμενον, καὶ τὸν νῦν ἐν τοῖς βαρβάροις 
ἔθνεσι βιούμενον: καὶ ὅσοι μὲν οὐδὲ ὄνομά σου 
γινώσκουσιν, ὅσοι δὲ τάχιστα ἐπιλήσονται, ὅσοι 
δὲ ἐπαινοῦντες ἴσως νῦν σε τάχιστα ψέξουσι: 
καὶ ὡς οὔτε ἡ μνήμη ἀξιόλογόν γε οὔτε ἡ δόξα 
οὔτε ἄλλο τι τὸ σύμπαν. 

λα΄. ᾿Αταραξία μὲν περὶ τῶν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐκτὸς 


1 ὡς ov P. 2 Perhaps ἀπαγέτω 


Ty, 6, 81, Sen. Hp. 79: fuer nos oportet agere licet 
nemo rideat. 


248 


BOOK IX 


that busy themselves with civic matters and flatter 
themselves that they act therem as philosophers! 
Drivellers all! What then, O Man? Do what 
Nature asks of thee now. Make the effort if ib be 
given thee to do so and look not abeut tu see if any 
shall] know it.) Dream not of soni but be content 
if the least thing go forward, and count the outcome 
of the matter im hand as a small thing For who 
can alter another's conviction ἢ Failing a change of 
conviction, we merely get men pretendmg to be 
persuaded and chafing Tike slaves under coercion 
Go to now and tell ine of UAlexander and Philip 
and Demetiius of Phalerum Whether they realized 
the will of Nature and schooled themselves thereto, 
is their concern. But if they played the tragedv- 
hero, no one has condemned me to cupy them 
Snnple and modest is the work of Philusophy: lead 
me not astray into pomposity and pride. 

30. Take a bird’s-eye view of the world, its endless 
gathermgs ? and endless ceremonials,t voyagings 
ΡΝ in πρῶ, aud calm, and the vicissitudes ot 
things coming into being, participating in bemg, 
ceasing to be. Reflect too on the life lived long agu 
by other men, and the hfe that shall be hved after 

thee, and is now being lived in barbarous countries ; 
and how many have’ never even heard thy name, 
and how many will very soon forget it, and how 
many who now perhaps acclaim, will very soon blame 
thee, and that neither memory nor fame nor anything 
thing else whatever is worth reckoning. 

31. Freedom from perturbance im all that befalls 


2 Or, reading οὐ μικρόν : deem the success of the mutter i 
hand no small ihing 3 vi. 3, 48. 


+ nearly = our colloquial ** tune tions,” 


249 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


αἰτίας συμβαινόντων, δικαιότης δὲ ἐν τοῖς 
παρὰ τὴν ἐκ σοῦ αἰτίαν ἐνεργουμένοις" τουτ- 
ἔστιν ὁρμὴ καὶ πρᾶξις καταλήγουσα ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸ 
τὸ κοινωνικῶς πρᾶξαι ὡς τοῦτό σοι κατὰ 
φύσιν ὄν. 

λβ΄. Πολλὰ περισσὰ περιελεῖν τῶν ἐνοχλούν- 
TOV σοι δύνασαι, ὅλα ἐπὶ τῇ ὑπολήψει σου 
κείμενα' καὶ πολλὴν εὐρυχωρίαν περιποιήσεις 
ἤδη σεαυτῷ, «τῷ ὦ τὸν ὅλον κόσμον περι- 
εἰληφέναι τῇ γνώμῃ, καὶ τὸν ἀίδιον αἰῶνα 
περινοεῖν, καὶ τὴν τῶν κατὰ μέρος ἑκάστου 
πράγματος ταχεῖαν μεταβολὴν ἐπινοεῖν, ὡς 
βραχὺ μὲν τὸ ἀπὸ γενέσεως μέχρι διαλύσεως, 
ἀχανὲς δὲ τὸ πρὸ τῆς γενέσεως, ὡς καὶ τὸ μετὰ 
τὴν διάλυσιν ὁ ὁμοίως ἄπειρον. 

λγ΄. Πάντα, ὅσα ὁρᾶς, τάχιστα φθαρήσεται 
καὶ οἱ φθειρόμενα αὐτὰ ἐπιδόντες τάχιστα καὶ 
αὐτοὶ φθαρήσονται" καὶ ὃ ἐσχατόγηρως ὦπο- 
θανὼν εἰς ἴσον καταστήσεται τῷ προώρῳ. 

λδ΄. Τίνα τὰ ἡγεμονικὰ τούτων, καὶ περὶ οἷα 
ἐσπουδάκασι, καὶ δι᾿ οἷα φιλοῦσι καὶ τιμῶσι. 
γυμνὰ νόμιζε βλέπειν τὰ ψυχάρια αὐτῶν. ὅτε 
δοκοῦσι βλάπτειν ψέγοντες ἢ ὠφελεῖν ἐξ- 
υμνοῦντες, ὅση οἴησις. 

re. Ἢ ἀποβολὴ οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἐστὶν ἢ μετα- 
βολή. τούτῳ δὲ χαίρει ἡ τῶν ὅλων φύσις, καθ᾽ 
ἣν πάντα, καθὼς " γίνεται, ἐξ αἰῶνος ὁμοειδῶς 
ἐγίνετο, καὶ εἰς ἄπειρον τοιαῦθ᾽ ἕτερα ἔσται. τί 
οὖν λέγεις, ὅτε ἐγίνετό τε πάντα «κακῶς; ὃ καὶ 

1 «τῷ» Gat. 


2 καλῶς PA: καθὼς Schenkl. 
® So Reiske: ὃ καὶ πάντα Ῥ : omit A, 


250 


BOOK IX 


from the external Cause, and justice in all that thine 
own inner Cause prompts thee todo; thatis, impulse 
and action finding fulfilment in the actual performance 
of social duty as being in accordance with thy nature. 

32. It is in thy power to rid thyself of many 
unnecessary troubles, for they exist wholly im thy 
imagination. Thou wilt at once set thy feet in a 
large room by embracing the whole Universe in thy 
mind and including in thy purview time ever- 
lasting, and by observing the rapid change mm every 
part of everything, and the shortness of the span 
between birth and dissolution, and that the vawn- 
ing immensity before birth is only matched by the 
infinity after our dissolution. 

35. All that thine eves behold will soon perish 
and they, who live to see it perish, will in their turn 
perish no less quickly; and he who outhves all his 
contemporaries and he who dies before his time will 
be as one in the grave. 

34, What is the ruling Reason! of these men, and 
about what sort of objects have they been in earnest, 
and from what motives do they lavish their love and 
their honour! View with the mind’s eye their poor 
little souls in their nakedness. What immense con- 
eeit this of theirs, when they fancy that there 1s bane 
in their blame and profit in their praises ! 

35. Loss and change,® they are but one. Therein 
doth the Universal Nature take pleasure,’ through 
whom are all things done now as they have been in 
like fashion from time everlasting ; and to eternity 
shall other like things be. Why then dost thou say 
that all things have been evil and will remain evil 

1 yu 34, 62; 1x. 18 


Ω 


2 The play on the words caunot be kept. Powis 18, 


251 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


πάντα ἀεὶ κακῶς ἔσται, καὶ οὐδεμία ἄρα 
δύναμις ἐν τοσούτοις θεοῖς ἐξευρέθη “ποτὲ ἡ 
διορθώσουσα ταῦτα, ἀλλὰ KATAKEKPLTAL ὁ κόσμος 
ἐν ἀδιαλείπτοις κακοῖς συνέχεσθαι; 

AS. To σαπρὸν τῆς ἑκάστῳ ὑποκειμένης ὕλης" 
ὕδωρ, κόνις, ὀστάρια, γράσος: ἢ πάλιν πῶροι γῆς 
τὰ μάρμαρα, καὶ droog Tab pat ὃ χρυσός, ὃ 
ἄργυρος, καὶ τριχία ἡ ἐσθής: καὶ αἷμα ἡ 
πορφύρα, καὶ τὰ ἄλλα πάντα τοιαῦτα. καὶ τὸ 
πνευμάτιον * δὲ ἄλλο τοιοῦτον καὶ ἐκ τούτων εἰς 
ταῦτα μεταβάλλον. 

λζ΄. “Αλὲς τοῦ ἀθλίου βίον, καὶ γογγυσμοῦ, 
καὶ πιθηκισμοῦ. τί ταράσσῃ; τί τούτων καινόν; 
τί σε ἐξίστησι; τὸ αἴτιον; ἴδε αὐτός. ἀλλ᾽ ἡ 
ὕλη; ide αὐτήν. ἔξω δὲ τούτων οὐδέν ἐστιν" 
ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς ἤδη ποτὲ ὡπλούστερος 
καὶ χρηστότερος γενοῦ. 

Ἴσον τὸ ἑκατὸν ἔτεσι καὶ τὸ τρισὶ ταῦτα 
ἱστορῆσαι. 

λη. Εἰ μὲν ἥμαρτεν, ἐκεῖ τὸ κακόν. τάχα & 
οὐχ ἥμαρτεν. 

λθ΄. Ἤτοι ἀπὸ μιᾶς πηγῆς νοερᾶς πάντα ὡς 
ἐνὺὶ σώματι ἐπισυμβαίνει, καὶ οὐ δεῖ τὸ μέρος τοῖς 
ὑπερ τοῦ ὅλον γινομένοις μέμφεσθαι: ἢ ἄτομοι 
καὶ οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ κυκεὼν καὶ σκεδασμός. τί 
οὖν ταράσσῃ; τῷ ἡγεμονικῷ λέγε" " “Τέθνηκας, 
ἔφθαρσαι, τεθηρίωσαι, ὑποκρίνῃ, συναγελάζῃ, 
βόσκῃ." 

μ΄. Ἤτοι οὐδὲν δύνανται οἱ θεοὶ ἢ δύνανται. 


! πνευματικὸν Cas.: πνευμάτιον PA. 
2 λέγεις PA: λέγε Cor. Perhaps λέγε σύ. 


BOOK IX 


to the end, and that no help has afterall been found 
in Gods, so many as they be. to right these things, 
but that the fiat hath gone forth that the Universe 
should be bound in an unbroken chain of ill? 

36. Seeds of decay in the underlying material of 
everything—water, dust, bones, reek ! Again, marble 
but nodules of earth, and gold and silver but dross, 
garments merely hair-tufts, and purple only blood. 
And so with everything else. The soul too 
another like thing and Hable to change from this 
to that. 

37. Have done with this miserable way of life, 
this grumbling, this apism! Why fret* What is 
the novelty here? Whatamazesthee? The Cause? 
Look fairly atit. What then, the Material? Look 
fairly at that. Apart from these two, there is nothing. 
But in regard to the Gods also now even at the 
eleventh hour show thyself more simple, more 
worthy. 

Whether thy experience of these things lasts three 
hundred years or three, it is all one. 

3%. If he did wrong, with him lies the evil. But 
maybe he did no wrong? 

39 Either there is one intelligent source, from 
which as im one body all after things proceed—and 
the part ought not to grumble at ‘what is done in 
the interests of the whole—or there are atoms, and 
nothing but a medley and a dispersion. Why then 
be harassed? Say to thy ruling Reason: Thow art 
dead! Thou art corrupt! Thou hast become a mild 
beast ! Thou art a hypocrite! Thou art one of the 
herd! Thou battenest mith them! 

40. Ἐπ μου the Gods have no power or they have 


1 iv. 26 2 vir 29. Say We vi svn. B22 an 18. 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


εἰ μὲν οὗν μὴ δύνανται, τί εὔχη; εἰ δὲ δυνανται, 
διὰ τί οὐχὶ μᾶλλον. εὔχῃ διδόναι αὐτοὺς τὸ μήτε 
φοβεῖσθαί τι τούτων μήτε ἐπεθυμεῖν τίνος 
τούτων “μήτε λυπεῖσθαι ἐπί τινι τούτων μᾶλλον 
ἤπερ τὸ μὴ παρεῖναί τι τούτων ἢ τὸ παρεῖναι; 
πάντως γάρ, εἰ δύνανται συνεργεῖν ἀνθρώποις, 
καὶ εἰς ταῦτα δύνανται συνεργεῖν. ἀλλὰ ἴσως 
ἐρεῖς, ὅτι " “Hor ἐμοὶ αὐτὰ οἱ θεοὶ ἐποίησαν." 
εἶτα οὐ κρεῖσσον χρῆσθαι τοῖς ἐπὶ σοὶ μετ᾽ 
ἐλευθερίας ἢ διαφέρεσθαι πρὸς τὰ μὴ ἐπὶ σοὶ 
μετὰ δουλείας καὶ ταπεινότητος; τίς δέ σοι εἶπεν, 
ὅτι οὐχὶ καὶ εἰς τὰ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν οἱ θεοὶ συλλαμ- 
βάνουσιν; ἄρξαι γοῦν περὶ τούτων εὔχεσθαι K καὶ 
ὄψει. οὗτος εὔχεται" “ Πῶς κοιμηθῶ μετ᾽ ἐκείνης. 
σύ: “Πῶς μὴ ἐπιθυμήσω τοῦ κοιμηθῆναι μετ᾽ 
ἐκείνης." ἄλλος" “ ἸΙῶς στερηθῶ ἐκείνου." ov 
“Πῶς μὴ χρήξω τοῦ στερηθῆναι." ἄλλος" “Πῶς 
μὴ ἀποβάλω τὸ τεκνίον. σύ" “ Πῶς μὴ φοβηθῶ 
ἀποβαλεῖν. ὅλως ὧδε ΕΞ ΗΒ τὰ τὰς εὐχάς, καὶ 
θεώρει, τί γίνεται. 

μα. Ὁ ᾿Επίκουρος λέγει, ὅτι “Ἔν τῇ νόσῳ 
οὐκ ἧσάν μοι αἱ ὁμιλίαι περὶ τῶν τοῦ “σωματίου 
πάθον Bob. πρὸς τοὺς εἰσιόντας τοιαῦτά τινα, 
φησίν, “ ἐλάλουν' ἀλλὰ τὰ προηγούμενα φυσιο- 
λογῶν διετέλουν, καὶ πρὸς αὐτῷ τούτῳ ὦν, πῶς 
ἡ διάνοια συμμετωλαμβάνουσα τῶν ἐν τῷ σαρκ- 
ἰδίῳ τοιούτων κινήσεων ἀταρακτεῖ, τὸ ἰδίον 
ἀγαθὸν τηροῦσα. οὐδὲ τοῖς ἰατροῖς ἐμπαρεῖχον," 


? ¢ 
φησί, “ καταφρυάττεσθαι, ὡς τι ποιοῦσιν, GAN ὁ 


1 προιούτων ὉΠ: ποιούντων A: ποιῶν τινων Schenkl 


levi. 44 
) 


2x. 27. St Paul, Rom viii. 26° τὸ πνεῦμα συναντιλαμ- 


254 


BOOK IX 


power. If they have πὸ power, why pray to them! ὃ 
But if they have power, why not rather pray that 
they should give thee freedom from fear of any of 
these things and from lust for any of these things and 
from grief at any of these things [rather] than that 
they should grant this or refuse that. For obviously 
if they can assist men at all, they can assist them in 
this. But perhaps thou wilt say: The Gods have put 
this in my power. Then is it not better to use what is 
in thy power like a free man than tu concern thyself 
with what is not in thy power like a slave and an 
abject? And who told thee that the Gods do not 
co-operate with us? even im the things that are m 
our power? Begin at any rate with prayers for such 
things and thou wilt see. One prays: Hom may { le 
nuth that woman!* Thou: How mey L nol lust to he 
with her! Another: fom may [ be quit of that man ! 
Thou: How may £ not nish fo be qut of hem! 
Another: How may [ not lose my little child! Thou: 
{Tow may £ not diead to lose hin*+ Ina word, give 
thy prayers this turn, and see what comes of it. 

41. Listen to Epicurus® where he says: fa my 
illness my talk was not of any bodily feelings, nor did 1 
chatter about such things to those who came to see me, but 
1 went on with my cardinal disquisitions on natural 
philosophy, dwelling especially on this point, how the 
mind, having perjorce its share δὴ such affections of 
the flesh, yet remains unperturbed, safeguarding its 
own proper guod. Nor did I—he goes on—let the 
physicians ride the high horse as if they were doimg 
βάνεται Gataker very aptly quotes Augustine, de Ciraé 
Christi 1. 15. Cur petitur quod ad nostram peértinet potes- 
tatem, si Deus non adjuvat voluntatem ? 


3 Sen Ep. 10 ad jin s Shak Luer, 50. 
+ Capit xxi ἃ 9. 5 See Diog. Laert. Byicus. § 10, 


255 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


βίος ἤγετο εὖ καὶ καλῶς." ταὐτὰ οὗν ἐκείνῳ ἐν 
νόσῳ, ἐὰν νοσῇς, καὶ ἐν ἄλλῃ τιτὴ περιστάσει" τὸ 
γὰρ μὴ ἀφίστασθαι φιλοσοφίας ἐν οἷς δήποτε τοῖς 
προσπίπτουσι μηδὲ [τῷ] ἰδιώτῃ καὶ ᾿ἀφυσιολόγφῳ᾽ 
συμφλυαρεῖν πάσης αἱρέσεως κοινόν" ee πρὸς 
μόνῳ δὲ τῷ νῦν πρρασσομένῳ εἶναι καὶ τῷ ὀργάνῳ. 
δι᾿ οὗ πράσσεις. 5 

μβ΄. “Ὅταν τινὸς ἀναισχυντίᾳ προσκόπτῃς, 
εὐθὺς πυνθάνου σεαυτοῦ" ““Δύνανται οὖν ἐν τῷ 
κόσμῳ ἀναίσχυντοι μὴ εἶναι ; ᾿ οὐ δύνανται. μὴ 
οὖν ἀπαίτει τὸ ἀδύνατον. εἷς γὰρ καὶ οὗτός 
ἐστιν ἐκείνων τῶν ἀναισχύντων, οὺς ἀνάγκη ἐν τῷ 
κόσμῳ εἶναι. τὸ δ αὐτὸ καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ πανούργου 
καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ ἀπίστου καὶ παντὸς τοῦ ὁτιοῦν 
ἁμαρτάνοντος ἔστω TOL “πρόχειρον. ἅμα γὰρ 
τῷ ὑπομνησθῆναι, ὅτι τὸ γένος τῶν τοιούτων 
ἀδύνατόν ἐστι μὴ “ὑπάρχειν, εὐμενέστερος ἔσῃ 
πρὸς τοὺς καθ᾽ ἕνα. εὔχρηστον δὲ κἀκεῖνο 
εὐθὺς ἐννοεῖν, “ Τίψα ἔδωκεν ἡ φύσις τῷ 
ἀνθρώπῳ ape THY πρὸς τοῦτο τὸ ἁμάρτημα. 
ἔδωκε γάρ, ὡς ἀντιφάρμακον πρὸς μὲν TOV 
ἀγνώμονα τὴν πρᾳότητα, πρὸς δὲ ἄλλον ἄλλην 
τινὰ δύναμιν. 

“Ὅλως δὲ ἔξεστί σοι μεταδιδάσκειν τὸν πε- 
πλανημένον' πῶς γὰρ ὃ ἁμαρτάνων ἀφαμαρτάνει 
τοῦ προκειμένου καὶ πεπλάνηται. τί δὲ καὶ 
βέβλαψαι; εὑρήσεις γὰρ μηδένα τούτων, πρὸς 
ods παροξύνῃ, πεποιηκότα τι τοιοῦτον, ἐξ οὗ ἣ 
διάνοιά σου χείρων ἔμελλε γενήσεσθαι' τὸ δὲ 


1 ἀφυσιολόγῳ Gat : φυσιολόγῳ (natural philosopher) PA. 
2 πράσσιι ῬΑ. This verb has no subject and Wilam. and 


Schenkl mark a lacuna before πρὸς μόνῳ: πράσσεις Reiske. 


256 


BOOK IX 


grand things, but my life went oa well and happily. 
hnitate him then in sickness, if thou art sick, and in 
any other emergency; for it is a commouplace of 
every sect not to renounce Philosophy whatever 
difficulties we encounter, nor to consent to babble 
as he does that is unenlightened in philosophy and 
nature; ... devote thyself to thy present work 
alone and thy instrument for performing it. 

42. When thou art offended by shamelessness in 
any one, put this question at once to thyself: Can it 
be that shameless men should not exist in the world? lt 
ean not be. Then ask not for what can not be.! 
For this man in question also 1s one of the shameless 
ones that must needs exist in the world. Have the 
same reflection ready for the rogue, the deceiver, or 
any other wrongdoer whatever. For the remem- 
brance that this class of men cannot but exist will 
bring with it kindlier feelings towards individuals of 
the class. Right useful too is it to bethink thee at 
once of this: Mhat virtue has Natwie given man as 
a foil to the mrong-doing ur question? For as an 
antidote against the unfeeling man she has given 
gentleness,” and against another man some other 
resource, 

In any case it is in thy power to teach the man 
that has gone astray the error of his ways. For 
every one that doth amiss misses his true mark and 
hath gone astray. But what harm hast thou suffered? 
Thou wilt find that not one of the persons against 
whom thou art exasperated has done anything 
capable of making thy mind worse; but it is in 


1y.17. cp. Dio 71. 34, § 4. 
2 Epict. Man. 10; St Paul, Tit ui. 2: πρᾳότητα πρὸς 
πάντας 


257 


rom 


.“᾿ 
4) 


εἶα 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


κακὸν σου καὶ τὸ βλαβερὸν ἐνταῦθα πᾶσαν τὴν 
ὑπόστασιν ἔχει. 

Τί δαὶ κακὸν ἢ ξένον γέγονεν, εἰ ὁ ἀπαίδευτος 
τὰ τοῦ ἀπαιδεύτου πράσσει; ὅρα, μὴ σεαυτῷ 
μᾶλλον ἐγκαλεῖν ὀφείλῃς, ὅτι οὐ προσεδόκησας 
τοῦτον τοῦτο ἁμαρτήσεσθαι. σὺ γὰρ καὶ ἀφορμὰς 
ἐκ τοῦ λόγου εἶχες πρὸς τὸ ἐνθυμηθῆναι, Ore εἰκός 
ἐστι τοῦτον τοῦτο ἁμαρτήσεσθαι, καὶ ὅμως 
ἐπιλαθόμενος θαυμάζεις, εἶ ἡμάρτηκε. 

Μάλιστα δέ, ὅταν ὡς ἀπίστῳ ἢ ἀχαρίστῳ 
μέμφῃ, εἰς σεαὺτ oD ἐπιστρέφου. προδήλως γὰρ 
σὸν τὸ ἁμάρτημα, εἴτε περὶ τοῦ τοιαύτην διά- 
θεσιν ἐ ἔχοντος ἐπίστευσας, ¢ ὅτι τὴν πίστιν φυλάξει, 
εἴτε Τὴν χάριν διδοὺς μὴ. καταληκτικῶς ἔδωκας, 
μηδὲ ὥστε ἐξ αὐτῆς τῆς σῆς πράξεως εὐθὺς 
ἀπειληφέναι πάντα τὸν καρπόν. 

Τί γὰρ πλέον θέλεις εὖ ποιήσας ἄνθρωπον; 
οὐκ ἀρκεῖ τοῦτο, ὅτε κατὰ φύσιν τὴν σήν τι 
ἔπραξας, ἀλλὰ τούτου μισθὸν ζητεῖς; ὡς εἰ ὁ 
ὀφθαλμὸς ἀμοιβὴν ἀπήτει, ὅτι βλέπει, ἢ οἱ 
πόδες, ὅτι βαδίξουσιν. ὥσπερ γὼρ ταῦτα πρὸς 
τόδε τι γέγονεν, ὥπερ κατὰ τὴν ἰδίαν κατασκευὴν 
ἐνεργοῦντα ἀπέχει τὸ ἴδιον, οὕτως καὶ ὁ ἄνθρωπ- 
ος εὐεργετικὸς πεφυκώς, ὁπόταν τι εὐεργετικὸν ἢ 
ἄλλως εἰς τὰ μέσα συνεργητικὸν πράξῃ, πεποίηκε, 
πρὸς ὃ κατεσκεύασται, καὶ ἔχει τὸ ἑαυτοῦ. 


ent lhe TRAP TE YT HS ESSAI mr 


1 Lait. there, i.e. an thy mind. 

“ ep. the stmking parallel m Dio 71 24, § 2, τὸ μηδὲν 
πιστὸν ἐν ἀνθρώποις εἶναι : ibid. 71. 26, § 2, πίστιν καταλύσαντι 
πιστὸν διαγενέσθαι, where Marcus 15 speaking to lus soldiers 
on the revolt of Cassius; and 27. § 1, where, wiitmg to the 
Senate, he calls Cassius ἀχάριστος I cannot help thinking 


258 


BOOK [IX 


thy mind} that the evil for thee and the harmful 
have their whole existence. 

Where is the harm or the strangeness un the 0} 
acting—like a boor? See whether thou art not 
thyself the more tu blame in not expecting that he 
would act thus wrongly. For thy reason tvo could 
have given thee means for concluding that this would 
most likely be the case. Nevertheless all this is 
forgotten, and thou art surprised at his wrongdoing. 

But above all, when thou findest fault with a 
man for faithlessness and ingratitude? turn thy 
thoughts to thyself. For evidently the fautt is thine 
own, whether thou hadsi faith that a man with such 
a character would keep faith with thee, or ar in 
bestowing a kindness thou didst uot bestow it 
absolutely and as from the very domy of it having 
at once received the full complete ἔλα. ὃ 

For when thou hast done a kindness, what more 
wouldst thou have? Is not this enough that thou 
hast done something m accordance with thy nature ἢ 
Seekest thou a recompense fur it~ As though the 
eye should claim a guerdon for seeing, or the feet 
for walking! For just as these latter were made tor 
their special work, and by carrying this out according 
to their individual constitution they come fully ite 
their own, so also man, formed as he is by nature 
for benefiting others, when he has acted ay bene- 
factor or as co-factor many other way for the general 
weal, has done what he was constituted for, and has 
what is his.* 
that this section of the Thouyhts was written at the time of 
the rebellion im 175, and that Marcus 1s here taking himself 
to task. ν, ὃ; vn 73 

ἀν, 49; and. ep. St. Matt vi 2 Marcus was noted ter 
εὐεργεσία, Dio 71. 34, 88; C.L.Gr, 2495, 2091. 


BIBAION |! 


α΄. "Eon ποτὲ ἄρα, ὦ ψυχή, ἀγαθὴ καὶ ἁπλῆ 
καὶ μία καὶ γυμνή, φανερωτέρα τοῦ περικειμένου 
σοι σώματος; γεύσῃ ποτὲ apa τῆς φιλητικῆς καὶ 
στερκτικῆς διαθέσεως; ἔσῃ ποτὲ apa πλήρης 
καὶ ἀνενδεὴς καὶ οὐδὲν ἐπιποθοῦσα οὐδὲ ἐπι- 
θυμοῦσα οὐδενὸς οὔτε ἐμψύχου οὔτε ἀψύχου 
πρὸς ἡδονῶν ἀπολαύσεις; οὐδὲ χρόνου, ἐ ἐν ᾧ ἐπὶ 
μακρότερον ἀπολαύσεις; οὐδὲ τόπου ἢ χώρας ἢ 
ἀέρων εὐκαιρίας οὐδὲ ἀνθρώπων εὐαρμοστίας; 
ἀλλὰ ἀρκεσθήσῃ τῇ παρούσῃ καταστάσει καὶ 
ἡσθήσῃ τοῖς παροῦσι mast, καὶ συμπείσεις σε- 
αυτήν, ὅτι πάντα, «ἅ»" σοι πάρεστι, παρὰ τῶν 
θεῶν “πάρεστι καὶ πάντα σοι εὖ ἔχει καὶ εὖ 
ἕξει, ὁ ὅσα φίλον αὐτοῖς καὶ ὅσα μέλλουσι δώσειν 
ἐπὶ σωτηρίᾳ τοῦ τελείου ζῴου, τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ καὶ 
δικαίου καὶ καλοῦ καὶ γεννῶντος πάντα καὶ 
συνέχοντος καὶ περιέχοντος καὶ περιλαμβάνον- 
τος διαλυόμενα εἰς γένεσιν ἑτέρων ὁμοίων; ἔσῃ 
ποτὲ ἄρα τοιαύτη, οἵα θεοῖς τε καὶ ἀνθρώποις 
οὕτω συμπολιτεύεσθαι, ὡς μήτε μέμφεσθαί τι 
αὐτοῖς μήτε καταγινώσκεσθαι ὑπ᾽ αὑτῶν; 


1 <&> Lemercier and Schenk]: παρὰ τῶν θεῶν πάρεστι καὶ 
transposed by Schenkl from hefore καὶ εὖ ἕξει P. 


260 


BOOK X 


1. Witr thou then, O my Soul, ever at last be 
good and simple and single and naked. shewing 
thy rself more visikle than the body that overlies 
thee> Wilt thou ever taste the sweets of a loving 
and a tender heart? Ever be full-filed and self’ 
sufficing, longing for nothing, lusting after nothing 
animate or inanimate, for the enjoyment of pleasures 
—not time wherein the lonyer tu enjoy them, nor 
place or country or congenial climes or men nearer 
to thy hking—but contented with thy present state! 
and delighted with thy present ev erything, conyvine- 
ing thyself withal that all that is present for thee 
is present from the Gods,? and that everything is 
and shall be well with thee that is pleasing to them 
and that they shall hereafter grant for the con- 
servation of that Perfect Being ὁ that is good and 
just and beautiful, the Begetter and Up holder of 
all things, that embraces and gathers them in, when 
they are dissolved, to generate therefrom other like 
things? 4 Wilt thou ever at last fit thyself so to bea 
fellow-citizen with the Gods and with men as never 
to find fault with them or meur their condemnation ἢ 

tae 6, cai 6 ee et ὃ ὃ, 

3 i.e. Zeus = the Universe = the First Cause = Nature 

+ vil. 23. 

261 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


/ 7 ᾽ὔ id 7 ᾽ “ ¢ 
β΄. Ἰαρατήρει, τί cou ἡ φύσις ἐπιζητεῖ, ws 
7 3 / 
ὑπὸ φύσεως μόνον διοικουμένου-: εἶτα ποίει αὐτὸ 
\ 7ὔ 3 \ a“ 7 / / 
καὶ προσίεσο, εἰ μὴ χεῖρον μέλλει διατίθεσθαί 
/ ? Chen \ / / 
σου ἡ ὡς ζῴου φύσις. ἑξῆς δὲ παρατηρητέον, τί 
- 7 \ “ n 
ἐπιζητεῖ cov ἡ ὡς ἕῴου φύσις: Kal πᾶν τοῦτο 
a 7 / 
παραληπτέον, εἰ μὴ χεῖρον μέλλει διατίθεσθαι ἡ 
¢ / ἴω 7 27 \ \ \ 
ὡς ζῴου λογικοῦ φύσις: ἔστι δὲ TO λογικὸν 
Ν / 7 \ ’ 
εὐθὺς καὶ πολιτικόν. τούτοις δὴ κανόσι χρώμενος 
\ 7 
μηδὲν περιεργάζου. 
͵ nn \ lal ” cf / 
y. Lav τὸ συμβαῖνον ἤτοι οὕτως συμβαίνει, 
δ 7 3 \ ; Ἃ ¢ 3 / 3 \ 
ὡς πέφυκας αὑτὸ φέρειν ἢ ws ov πέφυκας αὐτὸ 
\ 9 , ᾿ ΄ 
φέρειν. εἰ μὲν οὖν συμβαίνει σοι, ὡς πέφυκας 
t "9 ΄ ., ΑΔ’ κ , ) 
φέρειν, μὴ δυσχέραινε" ἀλλ ὡς πέφυκας, φέρε. 
’ / ¢ \ 4 / \ ’ 
εἰ δέ, ὡς μὴ πέφυκας φέρειν, μὴ δυσ χέραινε' 
“ 7 
φθαρήσεται γάρ σε ἀπαναλῶσαν. μέμνησο μέν- 
Ω / / “ ‘ Gt “ 
Tol, ὅτι πέφυκας φέρειν πᾶν, περὶ ov ἐπὶ TH 
¢ , ? \ a (a) \ \ Ἵ Ν 3 \ 
ὑπολήψει ἐστὶ TH σῇ φορητὸν καὶ ἀνεκτὸν αὐτὸ 
al , a 7 3 
ποιῆσαι, κατὰ φαντασίαν τοῦ συμφέρειν ἢ καθ- 
ἥκειν σεαυτῷ τοῦτο ποιεῖν. 
ὃ, Kv μὲν σφάλλεται, διδάσκειν εὐμενῶς 
Ν ~ 
καὶ TO παρορώμενον δεικνύναι' εἰ δὲ ἀδυνατεῖς, 
‘ nw 3 
σεαυτὸν αἰτιᾶσθαι, ἢ μηδὲ σεαυτόν. 
᾽ “ ", / lal , 3 
e. O τὸ ἄν σοι συμβαίνῃ, τοῦτό σοι ἐξ 
αἰῶνος προκατεσκευάξετο: καὶ ἡ ἐπιπλοκὴ τῶν 
7 , 
αἰτίων συνέκλωθε τήν τε σὴν ὑπόστασιν ἐξ 
/ \ 7 
ἀιδίου καὶ τὴν τούτου σύμβασιν. 
+ ΓΥ 3 ov / a / 
s. [ἴτε ἄτομοι εἴτε φύσις, πρῶτον κείσθω, 
Φ / , 4 a ef \ 
OTL μέρος εἰμὶ TOD ὅλου, ὑπὸ φύσεως διοικου- 
/ } ¢ 
μένου: ἔπειτα, OTL ἔχω πως οἰκείως πρὸς τὰ 


262 


BOOK ἃ 


2. Observe what thy nature asks of thee, as one 
controlled by Nature alone, then do this and with a 
good grace, if thy nature as a hving creature is not 
to be made worse thereby. Next must thou observe 
what thy nature as a living creature asks of thee. 
And this must thou wholly accept, τῇ thy nature as a 
rational living creature be not made worse thereby. 
Now the rational is indisputably also the civic. 
Comply with these rules then and be not needlessly 
busy about anything. 

3. All that befalls either so befalls as thou art 
fitted by nature to bear it or as thou art not fitted 
If the former, take it not amiss, but bear it as thou 
art fitted to do. If the latter, take not that amiss 
either, for when it has destroyed thee, it will itself 
perish. Howbeit be assured that thou art fitted by 
nature to bear everything which it rests with thine 
own opinion about it to render bearable and tolerable, 
according as thou thinkest it thy interest or thy duty 
to do so 

4. [f a man makes a slip, enlighten him with 
loving-kindness, and shew him wherein he hath 
seen amiss.? Failing that, blame thyself or not even 
thyself. 

5. Whatever befalls thee was set in train for thee 
from everlasting, and the interplication of causes was 
from eternity weaving into one fabric thy existence 
and the coincidence of this event.° 

6. Whether there be atoms or a Nature, let it be 
postulated first, that I am a part of the whole Uni- 
verse controlled by Nature; secondly, that I stand 
in some intimate connexion with other kindred parts. 


1 vin. 46. 2 vin. 59: x1. 9, 18, 18, $9. 
San. 11 1 iv. 90. 


tu 
oe 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


omoryerty μέρη. τούτων γὰρ μεμνημένος, καθότι μὲν 
μέρος εἰμί, οὐδενὶ δυσαρεστήσω τῶν ἐκ τοῦ ὅλου 
ἀπονεμομένων' οὐδὲν γὰρ βλαβερὸν τῷ μέρει, 
ὃ τῷ ὅλῳ συμφέρει. οὐ yap ἔχει τι τὸ ὅλον, ὃ 

μὴ συμφέρει ἑαυτῷ" πασῶν μὲν φύσεων κοινὸν 
ἐχουσῶν τοῦτο, τῆς δὲ τοῦ κόσμου προσειληφυίας 
τὸ μηδὲ ὑπό τινος ἔξωθεν αἰτίας ἀναγκάζεσθαι 
βλαβερόν τι ἑαυτῇ γεννᾶν. 

Κατὰ μὲν δὴ τὸ μεμνῆσθαι, ὃ ὅτι μέρος εἰμὶ ὅλου 
τοῦ τοιούτου, εὐαρεστήσω παντὶ τῷ ἀποβαίνοντι. 
καθόσον δὲ ἔχω πως οἰκείως πρὸς τὰ ὁμογενῆ 
μέρη, οὐδὲν πράξω ἀκοινώνητον, μᾶλλον δὲ 
στοχάσομαι τῶν ὁμογενῶν καὶ πρὸς τὸ κοινῇ 
συμφέρον πᾶσαν ὁρμὴν ἐμαυτοῦ ἄξω καὶ ἀπὸ 
τοὐναντίου ἀπάξω. τούτων δὲ οὕτω περαινο- 
μένων ἀνάγκη τὸν βίον εὐροεῖν, ὡς ἂν καὶ πολίτ- 
ov βίον εὔρουν ἐπινοήσειας προιόντος διὰ 
πράξεων τοῖς πολίταις λυσιτελῶν καί, ὅπερ ἂν 
ἡ πόλις ἀπονέμῃ, τοῦτο ἀσπαξζομένου. 

i ‘Tots μέρεσι τοῦ ὅλου, ὅσα φύσει περιέχε- 
ται ὑπὸ τοῦ κόσμου, ἀνάγκη φθείρεσθαι" λεγέσθω 
δὲ τοῦτο σημαντικῶς τοῦ ἀλλοιοῦσθαι: εἰ δὲ 
φύσει κακόν τε καὶ ἀναγκαῖόν ἐστι τοῦτο αὐτοῖς, 
οὐκ ἂν τὸ ὅλον καλῶς διεξώγοιτο, τῶν μερῶν εἰς 
ἀλλοτρίωσιν ἰόντων, καὶ πρὸς τὸ φθείρεσθαι δια- 
φόρως κατεσκευασμένων. πότερον γὰρ ἐπεχείρ- 
σεν ἡ φύσις αὐτὴ τὰ ἑαυτῆς “μέρη κακοῦν καὶ 
περιπτωτικὰ τῷ κακῷ καὶ ἐξ ἀνάγκης ἔμπτωτα 








1 vi. δέ: x. 38, § 4. ' 
2 ix, 22 


teal and % 


3 These words cau also be translated : parts of herself that 


204 


BOOK X 


For bearing this in mind, as Iam a part, I shall net 
be displeased with anvthing allotted me from the 
Whole. For what is advantageous to the whole can 
in no wise be injurious tu the part. For the Whole 
contains nothing that is not advantagevus to itself; 
and all natures have this in common, but the Cni- 
versal Nature is endowed with the additioual attrib- 
ute of never being forced by any external cause to 
engender anything hurtful to itself. 

As long then as I remember that I am a part of 
such a whole, I shall be well pleased with all that 
happens; and im so far as 1 aim in intimate connexion 
with the parts that are akin to invseilf, [ shall be 
guilty of no unsocial act, but I shall devote my atten- 
tion rather to the parts that are akin to myself,* and 
direct every impulse cf mine to the common interest 
and withhold it from the reverse of this. That 
being done, life must needs flow smoothly, as thou 
mayst see the life fow smoothly of a citizen who 
goes steadily on in a course of action beneficial to 
his fellow-citizens and cheerfully accepts whatever 1s 
assigned him by the State. 

7. The parts of the Whole—all that Nature has 
comprised in the Universe—must inevitably perish. 
taking “perish”’ to mean “be changed.” But if 
this process is by nature for them both evil and in- 
evitable, the Whole could never do its work satisfact- 
orily, its parts ever going as they do from change 
to change and being constituted to perish in diverse 
ways. Did Nature herself set her hand to bringing 
evil upon parts of herself and rendermg them not ouly 
liable to fall into evil but of necessity fallen into it, 


were both linble to frill mto such evil and by ueréssily jell ἀπο 
doing evr, 


265 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


3 \ \ A Ny > \ 7), \ 
εἰς TO κακὸν ποιεῖν, ἢ ἔλαθεν αὐτὴν τοιάδε τινὰ 
γινόμενα; ἀμφότερα γὰρ ἀπίθανα. 

Ei δέ τις καὶ ἀφέμενος τῆς φύσεως κατὰ τὸ 
πεφυκέναι ταῦτα ἐξηγοῖτο, καὶ ὡς γελοῖον ἅμα 
μὲν φάναι πεφυκέναι τὰ μέρη τοῦ ὅλου μεταβάλλ- 
εἰν, ἅμα δὲ ὡς ἐπί Tove TOV παρὰ φύσιν συμ- 
βαινόντων θαυμάζειν ἢ δυσχεραίνειν, ἄλλως τε 
καὶ τῆς διαλύσεως εἰς ταῦτα γινομένης, ἐξ ὧν 
ἕκαστον συνίσταται. ἤτοι γὰρ σκεδασμὸς στοιχ- 
εἰων ἐξ ὧν. συνεκρίθην, ἢ τροπὴ τοῦ μὲν 
στερεμνίου εἰς τὸ γεῶδες, τοῦ δὲ πνευματικοῦ 
εἰς τὸ ἀερῶδες: ὥστε καὶ ταῦτα ἀναληφθῆναι 
εἰς τὸν τοῦ ὅλου λόγον, εἴτε κατὰ περίοδον 
ἐκπυρουμένου εἴτε ἀιδίοις ἀμοιβαῖς ἀνανεου- 
μένου. 

\ \ / \ \ \ Ν \ 

Kai τὸ στερέμνιον δὲ καὶ τὸ πνευματικὸν μὴ 
φαντάζου τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς πρώτης γενέσεως. πᾶν γὰρ 
τοῦτο ἐχθὲς καὶ τρίτην ἡμέραν ἐκ τῶν σιτίων 

/ 7 
καὶ τοῦ ἑλκομένου ἀέρος τὴν ἐπιρροὴν ἔλαβεν. 
τοῦτο οὖν, ὃ ἔλαβεν, μεταβάλλει, οὐχ ὃ ἡ μήτηρ 
ἔτεκεν. ὑπόθου δ᾽, ὅτι ἐκείνῳ σε λίαν προσ- 
πλέκει | τῷ ἰδίως ποιῷ, οὐδὲν ὄντι οἶμαι πρὸς τὸ 
νῦν λεγόμενον. 

Ι͂ 3 f lA an a b) / 

η. Ὀνόματα θέμενος σαυτῷ ταῦτα, ἀγαθός, 

3 ΄ 5 / 4 7 ς 4 
αἰδήμων, ἀληθής, ἔμφρων, σύμφρων, ὑπέρφρων, 

1 προσπλέκει has no subject: σέ τι Fournier: σὺ λίαν 
προσπλέκῃ Rend. 

1 γῇ, 82. 

2 ἵν, 4. Lit. the pneumatic or bi eath element, See Index iii. 

3.3. Justin, Apol 1. 20; in. 7, contrasts the Christian 
theory of the destruction of the world by fire with the Stoic 


4 προσπλέκει haus no subiect ἐκείνῳ must he taken 
ρ . éf 
separately from τῷ ἰδίως ποιῷ and refer to τυῦτο ὃ ἔλαβεν, 


266 





or was she not aware that such was the case? 
Both alternatives are incredible. 

But supposing that we even put Nature as an 
agent out of the question and explain that these 
things are “naturally” so, even then it would be 
absurd to assert that the parts of the whole are 
naturally subject to change, and at the same time to 
be astonished at a thing or take it amiss as though 
it befell contrary to nature, and that though things 
dissolve into the very constituents out of which they 
are composed, For either there is a scattering of 
the elements! out of which [ have been built up, 
or a transmutation of the solid into the carthy and 
of the spiritual 7 into the aerial; so that these too 
are taken back into the Reason of the Universe, 
whether cycle by cycle it be consumed with fire ° 
or renew itself by everlasting permutations. 

Aye and so then do not be under the impression 
that the solid and the spintual date from the moment 
of birth. For it was but yesterday or the day before 
that all this took in itsincrement from the food eaten 
and the air breathed. [Ὁ is then this, that it took in, 
which changes, not the product of thy inother’s woinb. 
Bat granted that thou art ever so closely bound up } 
with that by thy individuality, this. Γ take it, has no 
bearing upon the present argument. 

8. Assuming for thyself the appellations, a good 
man,” « modest man,° a truthteller,’ wise of heart, 


” Sce on x. 16. 

" Capitohnus and Ammianus call Marcus verecunrdus 

’ Only two kings have had the honourable cognomen of 
Truthtelos, Marcus and Alfred the (treat. The former was 
given Porisstmus as a pet name by Hadrian when a child, 
and the town of Tyias in Scythia stamped if on its coms and 
Justin and Syneellus use ib bo destunate Mateus. 


207 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


πρόσεχε, μήποτε μετονομάξῃ: καὶ «εἰ» ἀπολλύεις 
ταῦτα τὰ ὀνόματα, καὶ ταχέως ἐπάνιε ἐπ᾽ αὐτά. 
μέμνησο δέ, ὅτι τὸ μὲν “ἔμφρων " ἐβούλετό σοι 
σημαίνειν τὴν ἐφ᾽ ἕκαστα διαληπτικὴν ἐ ἐπίστασιν 
καὶ τὸ ἀπαρενθύμητον' τὸ δὲ " ᾿σύμφρων," τὴν 
ἑκούσιον ἀπόδεξιν τῶν ὑπὸ τῆς κοινῆς φύσεως 
ἀπονεμομένων' τὸ δὲ ‘ ᾿ὑπέρφρων, " τὴν ὑπέρτασιν 
τοῦ φρονοῦντος μορίου ὑπὲρ λείας ἢ τραχείας 
κινήσεις * τῆς “σαρκὸς καὶ τὸ δοξάριον καὶ τὸν 
θάνατον καὶ ὅσα τοιαῦτα. ἐὰν οὖν διατηρῇς 
σεαυτὸν ἐν τούτοις τοῖς ὀνόμασι μὴ γλιχόμενος 
τοῦ ὑπ᾽ ἄχλων KATA ταῦτα ὀνομάζεσθαι, ἔσῃ 
ἕτερος, καὶ εἰς βίον εἰσελεύσῃ ἕτερον. τὸ γὰρ 
ἔτι τοιοῦτον εἶναι, οἷος μέχρι νῦν γέγονας, καὶ ἐν 
βίῳ τοιούτῳ σπαράσσεσθαι καὶ μολύνεσθαι, λίαν 
ἐστὶν ἀναισθήτου καὶ φιλοψύχου, καὶ ὁμοίου τοῖς 
ἡμιβρώτοις θηριομάχοις, οἴτενες μεστοὶ τραυμά- 
των καὶ λύθρου παρακαλοῦσιν ὅμως εἰς τὴν 
αὔριον φυλαχθῆναι, παραβληθησόμενοι τοιοῦτοι 
τοῖς αὐτοῖς ὄνυξι καὶ δήγμασιν. 

Ἐμβίβασον οὗν σαυτὸν εἰς τὰ ὀλίγα ταῦτα 
ὀνόματα" κἂν μὲν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν μένειν δύνῃ, μένε, 
ὥσπερ εἰς μακάρων τινὰς νήσους μετῳκεσμένος" 
ἐὰν δὲ αἴσθῃ, ὃ ὅτι ἐκπίπτεις, καὶ οὐ περιμκρατεῖς, 
ἄπιθι θαρῥῶν εἰς γωνίαν τινώ, ὅπου κρατήσεις, ἢ 
καὶ παντάπασιν ἔξιθι τοῦ βίου μὴ ὀργιζόμενος 
ἀλλὰ ἁπλῶς καὶ ἐλευθέρως καὶ αἰδημόνως εὖ 

1 εἶ: Schenkl. 


) 


2 κινήσεις Schenk] . κινήσεως A: κίνησιν P. 
δ T have written εὖ for ἐν PA 





' Yor Marcus’ views on suicide see ui. 1; v. 29; vill. 47 
ad fin. 5 ix, 2; x. 22, 32. He permits τὸ when external cond1- 


268 


BOOK X 


sympathetic of heart, great of heart, take heed thou 
be not new-named. And if thou shouldst forfeit 
these titles, e’en make haste to get back to them. 
And bear in mind that nise of hearf was meant to 
signify for thee a discerning consideration of every 
object and a thoroughness ‘of thought ; sympathetic 
of heart, a willing acceptance of all that the Uni- 
versal Nature allots thee : ; great of heart an uplifting 
of our mental part above the motions smooth or 
rough of the flesh, above the love of empty tame, 
the fear of death, and all other like things. Only 
keep thyself entitled to these appellations, not 
itching to receive them from others, and thou wilt 
be a new man and enter on a new life. For to be 
still such as thou hast been till now, and to submit 
to the rendings and defilements of such « life, is 
worthy of a man that shews beyond measure a dull 
senselessness and a clinging to hfe, and is on a level 
with the wild-beast fighters that are half-devoured 
in the arena, who, though a mass of wounds and 
gore, beg to be kept till the next day, only to be 
thrown again, torn as they are, to the same teeth 
and talons. 

Take ship then on these few attributes, and if 
thou canst abide therein, so abide as one who has 
migrated to some Isles of the Blest. But if thou 
feelest thyself adrift, and canst not win thy way, 
betake thyself with a good heart to some nook 
where thou shalt prevail, or even depart altogether 
from life,! not in wrath but in simplicity, inde- 
pendence, and modesty, having at least dune this 
tions render the hfe of virtue impossible, or when a man finds 


in himself a failure to live the true life (cp. St. Augustine's 
“Ὁ Let me die lest [ die’). 


269 


τω. Diog. Laert. Plato, 42; Ignat. Hph. §§ 1, 10; Justin, 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ω 7 Ae ol Ν > A , \ δ ς 
γε τοῦτο μόνον πράξας ἐν τῷ Bia, τὸ οὕτως 
ἐξελθεῖν. πρὸς μέντοι τὸ μεμνῆσθαι τῶν ὀνομ.- 
άτων μεγάλως συλλήψεταί σοι τὸ μεμνῆσθαι 
θεῶν, καὶ ὅτυπερ οὐ κολακεύεσθαι οὗτοι θέλουσιν, 
ἀλλὰ ἐξομοιοῦσθαι ἑαυτοῖς τὰ λογικὰ πάντα' 
καὶ εἶναι τὴν μὲν συκῆν τὰ συκῆς ποιοῦσαν, τὸν 
δὲ κύνα τὰ κυνός, τὴν δὲ μέλισσαν τὰ μελίσσης, 
τὸν δὲ ἄνθρωπον τὰ ἀνθρώπου. 

Θ΄. Mipos, πόλεμος, πτοία, νάρκα, δουλεία, 
καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἀπαλείψεταί σον τὰ ἱερὰ ἐκεῖνα 
όγματα, ὁπόσα ὁ φυσιολογητὸς * φαντάξῃ καὶ 
παραπέμπεις. δεῖ δὲ πᾶν οὕτω βλέπειν καὶ 
πράσσειν, ὥστε καὶ τὸ περιστατικὸν " ἅμα συν- 
τελεῖσθαι καὶ ἅμα τὸ θεωρητικὸν ὀνεργεῖσθαι, 
καὶ τὸ ἐκ τῆς περὶ ἑκάστων ἐπιστήμης αὔθαδες 
σώζεσθαι λανθάνον, οὐχὶ κρυπτόμενον. 

11ότε γὰρ ἁπλότητος ἀπολαύσεις; πύτε δὲ 
σεμνότητος; πότε δὲ τῆς ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου γνωρίσεως, 
τί τε ἐστὶ κατ᾽ οὐσίαν, καὶ τίνα χώραν ἔχει ἐν τῷ 
κόσμῳ, καὶ ἐπὶ πόσον πέφυκεν ὑφίστασθαι, καὶ 
ἐκ τίνων συγκέκριται, καὶ τίσι δύναται ὑ ὑπάρχειν, 
καὶ τίνες δύνανται αὐτὸ διδόναι τε καὶ 
ἀφαιρεῖσθαι. 

ἐς ᾿Αράχνιον μυΐαν Onpicay μέγα φρονεῖ, 
ἄλλος δὲ λαγίδιον, ἄλλος O€ U ὑποχῇ ἀφύην, ἄχλος 
δὲ συίδια, ἄχλος δὲ ἄρκτους, ἄλλος Σαρμάτας. 
οὗτοι γὰρ οὐ λησταΐ, ἐὰν τὰ δόγματα ἐξετάξης; 


1 ἀφυσιολογήτως Gat. (cp. 1x 41). 
2 πρακτικὸν (what is practicable) Cor. 


SAE ae oe 


Apol.1. 21; Diogn. Hp. 8 10; Juhan, Conviv. 427. 21, puts 
similar words in the mouth of Marcus 


270 


BOOK X 


one thing well in life, that thou hast quitted it thus. 
Howbeit, to keep these attributes in niamd it will 
assist thee greatly if thou bear the Gods im innd, 
and that it is not flattery they crave but for all 
rational thmgs to be conformed to their hkeness,! 
and that man should do a man’s work, as the fig tree 
does the work of a fig-tree, the dog of a dog, and 
the bee of a bee. 

9. Stage-apery, warfure, cowardice, torpor, serv- 
ility—these will day by day obliterate all those 
holy principles of thine which, as a sludent ot 
Nature,” thou dest conceive and accept. Bub thou 
must regard and do everything m such a way that 
at one und the same time the present task may be 
carried through, and full play given to the faculty 
of pure thought, and that the self-confidence en- 
gendered by a knowledge of each midividual thine 
be kept intact, unobtruded yet unconcealed. 

When wilt thou find thy dehght in simplicity ? 
When in dignity? = When in the knowledge of each 
separate thing, what it is im its essence, what place 
it fills in the Universe, how long it 1s formed by 
Nature to subsist, what are its component parts, to 
whom it can pertain, and who can bestow and tuke 
it away " 

10. A spider prides itself on capturing a fly ; one 
man on catching a hare, another on uetting a sprat, 
another on taking wild boars, another bears, another 
Sarmatians.? Are not these bngands, if thou test 
their principles ὃ 


4) 


ἀφυσιολογήτως, Would mean iithou due study of Nature. 
See Domaszewski, Mareus-Nai/e Plates, 62 102, for 
Marcus δ taking Narmatiaus”; and ep. the story of Alexander 
and the Scythian, Quintus Cuitius vi 8. 


«“ 
3 


271 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ια΄. Πῶς εἰς ἄλληλα πάντα μεταβάλλει, 
θεωρητικὴν μέθοδον κτῆσαι, καὶ διηνεκῶς πρόσ- 
εχε, καὶ συγγυμνάσθητι περὶ τοῦτο τὸ μέρος. 
οὐδὲν γὰρ οὕτω μεγαλοφροσύνης ποιητικὸν. 
ἐξεδύσατο τὸ σῶμα καὶ ἐννοήσας, ὅτι ὅσον 
οὐδέπω πάντα ταῦτα καταλιπεῖν ἀπιόντα ἐξ 
ἀνθρώπων δεήσει, ἀνῆκεν ὅλον ἑαυτὸν δικαιο- 
σύνῃ μὲν εἰς τὰ ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ ἐνεργούμενα, ἐν δὲ 
τοῖς ἄλλοις συμβαίνουσι Τῇ τῶν ὅλων φύσει. 
τί δ᾽ ἐρεῖ τις ἢ ὑπολήψεται περὶ αὐτοῦ ἢ πράξει 
κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ, οὐδ᾽ εἰς νοῦν βάλλεται δύο τούτοις 
ἀρκούμενος εἰ αὐτὸς δικαιοπρωγεῖ τὸ νῦν 
πρασσόμενον καὶ φιλεῖ τὸ νῦν ἀπονεμόμενον 
ἑαυτῷ' ἀσχολίας δὲ πάσας καὶ σπουδὰς ἀφῆκε, 
καὶ οὐδὲν ἄλλο βούλεται, ἢ εὐθεῖαν περαίνειν διὰ 
τοῦ νόμου καὶ εὐθεῖαν περαίνοντι ἕπεσθαι τῷ θεῷ. 

ιβ΄. Τίς ὑπονοίας χρεία, παρὸν “σκοπεῖν, τί 
δεῖ πραχθῆναι; κἂν μὲν συνορᾷς, εὐμενῶς 
ἀμεταστρεπτὶ ταύτῃ χωρεῖν" ἐὰν δὲ μὴ συνορᾷς, 
ἐπέχειν. καὶ συμβούλοις τοῖς ἀρίστοις χρῆσθαι 
ἐὰν δὲ ἐ ἕτερά τινα πρὸς 7 ταῦτα ἀντιβαίνῃ, προιέναι 
κατὰ τὰς παρούσας ἀφορμὰς λελογισμένως 
ἐχόμενον τοῦ φαινομένου δικαίου. ἄριστον γὰρ 
κατατυγχάνειν πούτου, ἐπεί τοι ἥ γε ἀπόπτωσις 
ἀπὸ τούτου ἐστίν.3 

Σχολαῖόν τι καὶ ἅμα εὐκίνητόν ἔσται καὶ 
φαιδρὸν ἅμα καὶ συνεστηκὸς ὁ τῷ λόγῳ κατὰ 
WAY ἑπόμενος. 

ty. Πυνθάνεσθαι ἑαυτοῦ εὐθὺς ἐξ ὕπνου 
γινόμενον" “Μήτι διοίσει cot, ἐὰν ὑπὸ ἄλλου 


1 εἰ Jackson: εἶ A: δικαιοπραγεῖν ,, φιλεῖν P. 


) 


2 ἔστω PA: ἔσται Men. 


272 


BOOK X 


Ll. Make thy own a scientific system of enquiry 
into the matual change of all things, and pay diligent 
heed to this branch of study and exercise thyse If ans 
it. For nothing is so conducive to greatness of mind. 
Let a man do this and he divests himself of his 
body and, realizing that he must almost at once 
relinquish all these things and depart from among 
men, he gives himself up wholly to just dealing in 
all his actions, and to the Universal Nature in all 
that befalls him. What others may say or think 
about him or do against him he does not even ἰοῦ 
enter his mind, being well satistied with these two 
things—yjustice in all present acts and contentment 
with his present lot.1 And he gives up all engrossing 
cares and ambitions, and has no other wish than to 
achieve the straight course through the Law and, by 
achieving it, to be a follower of God. 

12. What need of surmise when it lies with 
thee to decide what should be done, and if thou 
canst see thy course, to take it with a good grace 
and not turn aside; but if thou canst τοι see i to 
hold back and take ebinsel of the best counsellors ; 
and if any other obstacles arise therein, to geo 
forward as thy present means shall allow with 
careful deliberation holding to what is clearly 
just ? For to succeed in this is the best thing of 
all, since in fact to fail in this would be the only 
failure. 

Leisurely without being lethargic and cheerful as 
well as composed shall he be who ‘follows Reason in 
everything. 

13. Ask thyself as soon as thou art roused from 
sleep: [Vell it make any difference to me if another does 


lix. 6 ete. 


273 


MARCUS AURELIUS 

γένητωι τὰ δίκαια καὶ καλῶς ἔχοντα; ov 
διοίσει. μήτι ἐπιλέλησαι, ὅτι οὗτοι οἱ ἐν τοῖς 
περὶ ἄλλων ἐπαίνοις καὶ ψόγοις φρναττόμενοι, 
τοιοῦτοι μὲν ἐπὶ τῆς κλίνης εἰσί, τοιοῦτοι δὲ ἐπὶ 
τῆς τραπέζης, ota δὲ ποιοῦσιν, οἷα δὲ φεύγουσιν, 
οἷα δὲ διώκουσιν, οἷα δὲ κλέπτουσιν, οἷα δὲ 
ἁρπάζουσιν, οὐ χερσὶ καὶ ποσὶν ἀλλὰ τῷ τιεμιω- 
τάτῳ ἑαυτῶν μέρει, ᾧ γίνεται, ὅταν θέλῃ «-τις;», 
πίστις, αἰδώς, ἀλήθεια, νόμος, ἀγαθὸς δαίμων; 

ιδ΄. “Τῇ πάντα διδούσῃ καὶ ἀπολαμβανούσῃ 

ύσει ὁ πεπαιδευμένος καὶ αἰδήμων λέγει" “" Δὸς 

ὃ θέλεις, ἀπόλαβε ὃ θέλεις." λέγει δὲ τοῦτο οὐ 
ΠΡ Pa τῶνοι ἀλλὰ πειθαρχῶν μόνον καὶ 
Ρ “ 3 An 
εὐνοῶν αὐτῇ. 

ιε΄. Ὀλίγον ἐστὶ τὸ ὑπολειπόμενον τοῦτο. 
ζῆσον ὡς ἐν ὄρει. οὐδὲν γὰρ διαφέρει, ἐκεῖ ἢ 
ὧδε, ἐάν τις πανταχοῦ ὡς ἐν πόλει τῷ κόσμῳ. 
ἰδέτωσαν, ἱ ἱστορησάτωσαν οἱ ἄνθρωποι ἄνθρωπον 
ἀληθινὸν κατὰ φύσιν ζῶντα. εἰ μὴ φέρουσιν, 
ἀποκτεινάτωσαν. κρεῖττον γὰρ ἢ οὕτω ζῆν." 

is’. Μηκέθ᾽ ὅλως περὶ τοῦ, οἷόν τινα εἶναι τὸν 
ἀγαθὸν ἄνδρα <el>, διαλέγεσθαι, ἀλλὰ εἶναι 
τοιοῦτον. 

ιζ. Τοῦ ὅλου αἰῶνος, καὶ τῆς ὅλης οὐσίας 
συνεχῶς φαντασία," καὶ ὅτι πάντα τὰ κατὰ μέρος 

1 ψέγηται Lofft; but cg. viii. 56 for meaning. 


2. ἢ <p> οὕτω ζῆν would seem to make better sense. 
3 φαντασία --ἔστω Reiske. 


“το omeamriad 





vu. 33 ix. 41. 

in. 4 αα fin. ; νι. 69; vii. 62; viii. 52, 535 ix. 34. 

vil. 17. 4 cp. Jobi. 21, 

x. 23. This striking phrase seems from a comparison ot 
§ 23 to mean: Count your hfe here in the city and Court, or, 


274 


ξ- τὸ ἘΣ 


σι 


BOOK X 


what ws just and right? It will make none. Hast 
thou forgotten that those who play the wanton! in 
ineir praise and blame of others, are such as they 
are? in their beds, at their board; and what are the 
things that they do, the things that they avoid or 
pursue, and how they pilfer and plunder, not with 
hands and feet but with the most precious part of 
them, whereby a man calls into being at will faith, 
modesty, truth, law, and a good “ genius’ ?2 

14. Says the well-schooled and humble heart to 
Nature that vives and takes back all we have; Guve 
what thou wilt, take back what thow will But he 
says 1t without any bravado of fortitude, in simple 
obedience and good will to her. 

ἰδ. Thou has but a short time left to live. Live 
as on a mountain®; for whether it be here or there, 
matters not provided that, wherever a man live, he 
live as a citizen of the World-City.6 Let men look 
upon thee, cite thee, as a man in very deed that 
lives according to Nature. If they cannot bear 
with thee, let them slay thee. For it were better 
so than to live their life. 

16. Put an end once for all to this discussion of 
what a good man should be, and be one.* 

17. Continually picture to thyself Tine as a whole, 
and Substance as a whole, and every individual 


maybe, camp, as no whit worse than hfe in the free and 
health-giving air of a mountain-top with all its serenity and 
leisure for study and contemplation. It rests with you to 
make your ‘little plot within you” what you please. Lut, 
taken alone, ‘ Live as on a mountain” might mean ‘Live in 
the open light of day under the eyes of God and men in a 
purer atmosphere above the pettinesses of the world.” 

Ay. 3, Ὁ 

7 Dio (71. 34, § 5) says of Marcus ὡς ἀληθῶς ἀγαθὸς ἀνὴρ ἦν. 


275 
Ῥ 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


¢ , ὯΝ 
ὡς μὲν πρὸς οὐσίαν κεγχραμίς, ὡς δὲ “τρὸς 
χρόνον τρυπάνου 7 ποριστροφή). 
τη. Ma ds. ἕκαστον τῶν ὑποκειμένων ἐφιστάντα 
ἐπινοεῖν αὐτὸ ἤδη διαλυύμενον καὶ ἐν μεταβολῇ 
Ὁ BS 3 
καὶ οἷον σήψει ἢ σκεδάσει γινόμενον ἢ καθότι 
ee 
ἕκαστον πέφυκεν ὥσπερ θνήσκειν. 
θ΄ ἥξει τὴν γ bi Gi τε @ ὃ 3 Ζ 
ιθ΄. Οἷἱοί εἰσιν ἐσθίοντες, καθεύδοντες, ὀχεύ- 
OVTES, ἀποπατοῦντες, τὼ ἄλλα. εἶτα οἷοι ἀνδρο- 
νομούμενοι "1 καὶ γωυρούμενοι ἢ χαλεπαίνοντες 
καὶ ἐξ ὑπεροχῆς ἐπιπλήττοντες. πρὸ ὀλίγου δὲ 
,ὔ - 
ἐδούλευον πόσοις, καὶ δι᾽ οἷα, καὶ μετ᾽ ὀλίγον ἐν 
΄ 7) 
τοιούτοις ἔσονται. 
¢ ὡν / ς , a f 3 7 e 
κα. Συμῴερει ἑκάστῳ, ὃ φέρει ἑκάστῳ ἢ 
“ ν f / ¢ 7 
τῶν ὅλων φύσις" καὶ τότε συμφέρει, ὅτε ἐκείνη 
/ 
φέρει. 
f 
Ka. “loa μὲν ὄμβρου γαῖα: ἐρᾷ δὲ ὁ σεμνὸς 
25 SN 
αἰθήρ. ἐρᾷ δὲ ὁ κόσμος ποιῆσαι, ὃ ἂν μέλλῃ 
γίνεσθαι. λέγω οὖν τῷ κόσμῳ, ὅτι “ool συνερῶ.᾽ 
μήτι δ᾽ οὕτω κἀκεῖνο λέγεται, OTL “ φιλεῖ τοῦτο 
γίνεσθαι"; 
} ἴων ω] \ 3 
κβ΄. Ἤτοι ἐνταῦθα Sis καὶ ἤδη εἴθικας, ἢ 
2) e f Ἀ fa) By 4 a 2 ΄ 
ἔξω ὑπάγεις καὶ τοῦτο ἤθελες, ἢ ἀποθνήσκεις 
a) f 
καὶ ἀπελειτούργησας" mapa δὲ ταῦτα οὐδέν. 
Ἂ 7 
οὐκοῦν εὐθύμει. 


“ “ἢ \ 2 3... “ e/ fa) 
κγ΄. Evapyes ἔστω ἀεὶ τὸ, OT ut τοιοῦτο 
ἐκεῖνον * ὁ ἀγρός ἐστι: καὶ πῶς πάντα ἐστὶ ταὐτὰ 


ἐνθάδε τοῖς ἐν ἄκρῳ τῷ ὄρε:, ἢ ἐπὶ τοῦ αἰγιαλοῦ, 


1 ἀνδρονούμενο! can hardly be right, but ἀνδρογυναύμενοι 
which at once occurs tu one Is suon seen to be out of 
keeping with the other words m the passage: ἁβρυνόμενοι 
Reiske. 

2 ἐκεῖνος Reiske: τοῦτο ἐκεῖνο Cor. ταὐτὸ ἐκείνῳ Richards 


276 


BOOK X 


thing, in respect of substance, as but a fig-see ‘d and, 
in respect to time, as but a twist of the drill. 

18. Regarding attentively every vuxisling thing 
reflect that it is “alre ady disintegrating and changing, 
and as it were in a state of decomposition aud 
dispersion, or that everything is by natare made but 
to die. 

19. What are they like when eating, sleeping, 
coupling, evacuating, and the rest!) What again when 
lording it over others, when puffed up with pride, 
when filled with resentment or rebuking others from 
a loftier plane! Yet but a moment ago they were 
lackeying how θην and for what cnds, and anon 
will be at thew old trade.! 

20. What the Universal Nature brings to every 
thing is for the benefit of that thing, and for its 
benefit then when she brings it.? 

21. Lhe earth isan love with showers and the maypestic sky 
ws an fove.® And the Universe is in love with making 
whatever has to be. To the Universe I say: Zogethe 
wilh thee 1 null be in love. Is it not a way we have 
of speaking, to say, Z'has or thut loves to be so? 

22. Hither thy life is here and thou art inured to 
it; or thou goest elsewhere and this with thine own 
will; or thou diest and hast served out thy service. 
There is no other alternative. Take heart then. 

23. Never lose sight of the fact that a man’s 
‘freehold’ + is such as I told thee, and how all the 
conditions are the same here as on the top of 


1 Or, taking Gatakers emendation (ὁποίοις), mm what εὐ}: 
will they be! waves 

ὁ Kur. fray 890. After σεμνὸς Nur. has οὐρανὸς. πληρού 
μενος “OuBpov πεσεῖν eis γαῖαν ’Adpoditns ὕπο. ὦ» Aesch 
Doan. Fray. 41, bnitated by Shelley im lis Lore’s Philosophy 

ἐν, 3, § 4. 


277 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἢ. ὅπου θέλεις. ἄντικρυς γὰρ εὑρήσεις τὰ τοῦ 
Πλάτωνος" «ΝΣ ηκὸν ἐν ὄρει," φησί, “ περιβαλλό- 
μενος, καὶ ἢ Ἰβδάλλων βιληχήματα. ἢ" 

KO. Τί ἐστί μοι τὸ ἡγεμονικόν μου; καὶ ποῖόν 
TL ἐγὼ αὐτὸ ποιῶ νῦν; καὶ πρὸς τί ποτε αὐτῷ 
νῦν χρῶμαι; μήτι κενὸν νοῦ ἐστι; μήτι ἀπόλυτον 
καὶ ἀπεσπασμένον κοινωνίας; μῆτι προστετηκὸς 
καὶ ἀνακεκραμένον τῷ σαρκιδίῳ, ὥστε τούτῳ 
συντρέπεσθαι; 

κέ. ‘O τὸν κύριον φεύγων δραπέτης" κύριος 
δὲ ὁ νόμος καὶ ὁ παρανομῶν δραπέτης. ἀλλὰ 
καὶ ὁ λυπούμενος ἢ ὀργιζόμενος ἢ φοβούμενος 
ov? βούλεταί τί γεγονέναι ἢ γίνεσθαι ἢ γενέσθαι 
τῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ τὰ πάντα διοικοῦντος τεταγμένων, 
ὅς ἐστι νόμος νέμων, ὅσα ἑκάστῳ ἐπιβάλχλει. ὁ 
ἄρα φοβούμενος ἢ λυπούμενος ἢ ὀργιζόμενος 
Speen: 

KS. Σπέρμα εἰς μήτραν ἀφεὶς ἀπεχώρησε 
καὶ λοιπὸν ἄλλη αἰτία παραλαβοῦσα ἐργάζεται 
καὶ ἀποτελεῖ βρέφος, ἐξ οἵου οἷον" πώλιν τροφὴν 
διὰ φάρυγγος ἀφῆκε καὶ λοιπὸν ἄλλη. αἰτία 
παραλαβοῦσα αἴσθησιν καὶ ὁρμὴν καὶ τὸ ὅλον 
Conv καὶ ῥώμην καὶ ἄλλα ὅσα καὶ οἷα ποιεῖ. 
ταῦτα οὖν [τὰ] ἐν τοιαύτῃ ἐγκαλύψει γινόμενα 

1 καὶ, perhaps κἀκεῖ : βδάλλων Cor.: βδάλλειν A: βάλλειν Ῥ: 
βληχήματα ϑύιοῃ.. βλήχματα A 2 οὐ Nauck: ὃ PA. 


1 iv. 3 ad init. ; x. 15. 

2 Theaet. 174 D: ᾿Αγροῖκον καὶ ἀπαίδευτον ἀπὸ ἀσχολίας οὐδὲν 
ἧττον τῶν νομέων τὸν τοιοῦτον ἀναγκαῖον γενέσθαι σηκὸν ἐν ὄρει 
τὸ τεῖχος περιβεβλημένον. It is not easy to see the applica- 
tion of the words here. Marcus seems to mean that the king 
in the midst of lis royal city is no better off, ivso facto, than 


278 


BOOK X 


mountain! or on the sea-shore or wherever thou 
pleasest Quite apposite shalt thou find to be the 
words of Plato®: Compassed about (by the erty wall 
as) by a sheep-fold an the mountain, and milking 
flocks. 

24. What is my ruling Reason and what am I 
making of it now? To what use do I now put ii? 
Is it devoid of intelligence? Is it divorced and 
severed from neighbourliness? Dees it so coalesce 
and blend with the flesh as to be swayed by it? 

25. He that flies from his imaster is a runaway. 
But the Law 1s our master,? and he that transgresses 
the Law is a runaway. Now he also, that is moved 
by grief or wrath or fear, is fain that something 
should not have happened or be happening or happen 
in the future of what has been ordained by that 
which controls the whole Universe, that is by the 
Law laying down all that falls to a man’s ἰοῦ, Ele 
then is a runaway who is moved by fear, grief, or 
wrath. 

26. A man passes seed into a womb and goes his 
way, and anon another cause takes it in hand and 
works upon it and perfects a babe—what a con- 
summation trom what a beginning!! Again he” 
passes food down the throat, and anon another cause 
taking up the work creates sensation and impulse 
and in fine, life and strength and other things how 
many and how mysterious ! Muse then on these 


the shepherd im his mountain fold. It is the little “ plot 
within him,” his ruling Reason that makes the diflerence. 
The use of ἐν ὄρει twice in this section appears to have a 
reference to its a in § 15. Sar. 16 ad fin. 
+ ep, the remarkable parallel in Justin, pol. 1. 19. 
» ‘Phere is no subject expressed. It is possible to take the 
child as the subject, 


279 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


θεωρεῖν καὶ τὴν δύναμιν οὕτως ὁρᾶν, ὡς καὶ τὴν 
βρίθουσαν καὶ τὴν ἀνωφερῆ ὁρῶμεν, οὐχὶ τοῖς 
ὀφθαλμοῖς, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ ἧττον ἐναργῶς. 
κζ΄. Συνεχῶς ἐπινοεῖν, TOS πάντα τοιαῦτα, 
\ 
ὁποῖα νῦν γίνεται, καὶ πρόσθεν ἐγίνετο" καὶ 
ἐπινοεῖν γενησόμενα. καὶ ὅλα δράματα καὶ 
” Ὁ 7 fal a! 3 fast 
σκηνὰς ὁμοειδεῖς, ὅσα ἐκ πείρας τῆς σῆῖῆς ἢ τῆς 
, Ν 
πρεσβυτέρας ἱστορίας ἔγνως, πρὸ ὀμμάτων 
τίθεσθαι, οἷον αὐλὴν ὅλην ᾿Αδριανοῦ καὶ αὐλὴν 
ὅλην ᾿Αντωνίνου καὶ αὐλὴν ὅλην Φιλίππου, 
3 / / , \ 3 a a 
Αλεξάνδρου, Kpoicou: πάντα yap ἐκεῖνα τοιαῦτα 
χ 7 / 
ἦν, μόνον Ou ἑτέρων. 
͵ 7 7 Ν > 3 ¢ ~ 7 
κη΄. Φαντάζου πάντα τὸν ἐφ᾽ ῳὠτινιοῦν λυπού- 
μενον ἢ δυσαρεστοῦντα ὃ ὅμοιον τῷ θυομένῳ χοιρ- 
ἐδίῳ καὶ ἀπολακτίξοντι καὶ κεκραγότε" ὅμοιον καὶ 
ὃ οἰμώξων ἐπὶ τοῦ κλενιδίου μόνος σιωπῇ τὴν 
ἔνδεσιν ἡμῶν: καὶ ὅτι μόνῳ τῷ λογικῷ Cow 
΄ / a“ \ 
δέδοται τὸ ἑκουσίως ἕπεσθαι τοῖς γινομένοις" TO 
δὲ ἕπεσθαι ψιλὸν πᾶσιν ἀνωγκαῖον. 
7 \ , 415 id 7 Ὁ σι 
κθ΄. Kata μέρος ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου, ὧν ποιεῖς, 
> 7 3 , f ςς ΜΕ ¢ - \ 
ἐφιστάνων ἐρώτα σεαυτὸν, “ Ki ὁ θάνατος δεινὸν 
t& τὸ τούτου στέρεσθαι." 
/ 
NX. Ὅταν προσκόπτῃς ἐπί τινος ἁμαρτίᾳ, 
εὐθὺς μεταβὰς ἐπιλογίξου, τί παρόμοιον ἃ ἁμαρτάν- 
/ 
εἰς" οἷον ἀργύριον ἀγαθὸν εἶναι κρίνων «ἢ; 
τὴν ἡδονὴν ἢ τὸ δοξάριον καὶ κατ᾽ εἶδος. 





Δ νι, 49, 3 ψῃὶ, 95, 3], 

Sep Sen. Hp. 107: ducunt volentem fata nolentem trahunt ; 
de Vit. Beat. 15; Cleanthes, Lymn to Zeus: ὡς ἕψομαί γ᾽ 
&oxvos: ἣν δὲ μὴ θέλω κακὸς γενόμενος. οὐδεν ἧττον ἕψομαι 

4 vil. 26; xi. 18, § 4. 

5 Marcus had a horror of avarice; cp. Vule. Gallic Jud. 


280 


é 


BOOK ἃ 


things that are done in such secrecy, and detect the 
efficient force, just as we detect the descensive and 
the ascensive none the less clearly that 1f is not with 
our eyes. 

27. Bear in mind continually how all such things 
as now exist existed also before our day! and, be 
assured, will exist after us. Set betore thine eyes 
whole dramas and their settings, one like another, 
all that thine own experience has shewn thee or thou 
hast learned from past history, for instance the entire 
court of Hadrianus,? the entire court of Antoninus, 
the entire court of Philip, of Alexander, of Croesus. 
For all those scenes were such as we sce now, only 
the performers being different. 

28. Picture to thyself every one that is grieved at 
any occurrence whatever or dissatisfied, as being like 
the pig which struggles and screams when sacrificed ; 
like it too him who, alone upon his bed, bewails in 
silence the fetters of our fate; and that to the 
rational creature alone has it becn granted to submit 
willingly to what happens, mere subinission being 
imperative on 8]]." 

29. In every act of thine pause at each step and 
ask thyself: Js death lo be dreaded for the loss of this ? 

30. Does another's wrong-doing shock thee * 
Turn incontinently to thyself and bethink thee what 
analogous wrong-doing there is of thine own,‘ such 
as deeming money to be a good® or pleasure® or a 
little cheap fame’? and the hke. For by marking 
cliod. Cass viii 5: ὧν imperatore avuritiam acerbissrmiune esse 
ναί. Yet he was accused of it and vepudiated the charge 


™~ * . 
(Capit xxix 5); and he ws also exeulpated by Dio (71. 32, 
a) 4 ‘ oye δι ᾿ . 

δ 9), and in the Oayrr Papyr (1 op. 62) we find an Kv yptian 
ὧν 11} expressly calling him ἀφιλάργυμος 
’ See on vo. fee ory. LY. 


281 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τούτῳ γὰρ ἐπιβάλλων ταχέως ἐπιλήσῃ τῆς 
ὀργῆς συμπίπτοντος τοῦ, ὅτι βιάξεται: τί γὰρ 
ποιήσει; ἤ, εἰ δύνασαι, ἄφελε αὐτοῦ τὸ βιαξ. 
όμενον. 

λα΄. Σατύρωνα ἰδὼν Σωκρατικὸν φαντάζου 
ἢ υὐτύχην ἢ Ὑμένα, καὶ ἴυὐφράτην ἰδὼν 
Εὐτυχίωνα ἢ Ξιλονανὸν φαντάζου, καὶ ᾿Αλκί- 
φρονα Τροπαιοφόρον φαντάξον, καὶ Σευῆρον 
ἰδὼν Κρίτωνα ἢ Eevopavra φαντάξου, καὶ εἰς 
ἑαυτὸν ἀπιδὼν τῶν Καισάρων τινὰ φαντάζου, 
καὶ ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου τὸ ἀνάλογον. εἶτα συμπροσπιπτ- 
έτω σοι “ Ποῦ οὖν ἐκεῖνοι; οὐδαμοῦ ἢ ὁπουδή. 
οὕτως γὰρ συνεχῶς θεάσῃ τὰ ἀνθρώπινα καπνὸν 
καὶ τὸ μηδέν: μάλιστα ἐὰν συμμνημονεύσῃς, ὅτι 
τὸ ἅπαξ μεταβαλὸν οὐκέτι ἔσται ἐν τῷ ἀπείρῳ 
χρόνῳ. τί οὗν ἐντείνῃ; τί δ᾽ οὐκ ἀρκεῖ σοι τὸ 
βραχὺ τοῦτο κοσμίως διαπερᾶσαι; 

Olay ὕλην καὶ ὑπόθεσιν φεύγεις; τί γάρ ἐστι 
πάντα ταῦτα ἄλλο πλὴν γυμνάσματα AOYOU ἑωρ- 
ακότος ἀκριβῶς καὶ φυσιολόγως τὰ ἐν τῷ βίῳ; 
μένε οὗν, μέχρι ἐξοικειώσῃς σαυτῷ καὶ ταῦτα, ὡς 
ὁ ἐρρωμένος στόμαχος πάντα ἐξοικειοῖ, ὡς τὸ 
λαμπρὸν πῦρ, ὅ τι ἂν βάλῃς, φλόγα ἐξ αὐτοῦ καὶ 
αὐγὴν ποιεῖ, 

λβ΄. Μηδενὶ ἐξέστω εἰπεῖν ἀληθεύοντι περὶ 
σοῦ, ὅτι ovy ἁπλοῦς ἢ ὅτι οὐκ ἀγαθός" ἀλλὰ 
1 Leopold transposed Σενῆρον (see 1, 14) and Ξενοφῶντα. 

2 σὺ (τί A) οὖν P: ἐν τίνι PA: ἐντείνῃ Cor. (cp. ix. 28). 





1 vii, 63. 
2 Xenophon and Crito are well known Severus was prob- 
ably the father of Marcus’ son-in-law (1 14). Euphrates 


282 


BOOK ΣΧ 


this thou wilt quickly forget thy wrath, with this 
reflection too to aid thee, that a man is under 
constraint?; for what should he do? Or, if thou art 
able, remove the constraint 

31. Leta glance at Satyron call up the image of 
Socraticus or Eutyches or Hyinen, and a gvlince at 
Euphrates the image of Kutychion or Silvanus, and a 
glance at Aleiphron Tropaeophorus, and at Severus 
Xenophon or Crito.2 Let a glance at thyself bring to 
mind one of the Caesars, and so by analogy in every 
ease. Then let the thought strike thee: MVhere are 
they now? Nowhere,’ or none can say where. For 
thas shalt thou habitually look upon huinan things 
as mere smoke ὁ and as naught; and more than ever 
so, if thou bethink thee that what has once 
changed will exist no more throughout eternity. 
Why strive then and strain?’ Why not be content 
to pass this thy short span of hfe in becomimeg 
fashion ἢ 

What material, what a field for thy work dost 
thou forgo! For what are all these things but objects 
for the exercise of a reason that hath surveyed with 
accuracy and due inquiry into its nature the whole 
sphere of life? Continue then until thou hast 
assimilated these truths also to thyself, as the vigorous 
digestion assimilates every food, or the blazing fire 
converts into warmth and radiance whatever is cast 
into it.® 

2. Give no one the right to say of thee with 
truth that thou art not a sincere, that thou art nota 


was the philosopher fiend of Phny and dtadvian. Nothing 


certain 18 known of the others. hvu. ὅδ. 
ὁ χ 38 and verses at end of ms A. See Introd p ]. 
° The ms. reading wheal éhew (or, thou then) om mhat? 1s 


unintelligible. Owe 1, 


ra) 
203 


bo 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ψευδέσθω, ὅστις τούτων τί περὶ σοῦ ὑπολήψεται. 
πᾶν δὲ τοῦτο ἐπὶ σοί. τίς “γὰρ ὁ κωλύων ἀγαθὸν 
elval σε καὶ ἁπλοῦν; σὺ μόνον κρῖνον μηκέτι ζῆν, 
εἰ μὴ τοιοῦτος ἔσῃ. οὐδὲ γὰρ αἱρεῖ λόγος μὴ 
τοιοῦτον ὄντα. 

λγ΄. Τί ἐστι τὸ ἐπὶ ταύτης τῆς ὕλης δυνάμενον 
κατὰ τὸ ὑγιέστατον πραχθῆναι ἢ ῥηθῆναι; ὅ τι 
γὰρ ἂν τοῦτο ἢ, ἔξεστιν αὐτὸ πρᾶξαι ἢ εἰπεῖν' 
καὶ μὴ προφασίξου ὡς κωλυόμενος. 

Οὐ ) πρότερον παύσῃ στένων, πρὶν ἢ τοῦτο πάθῃς, 
ὅτι οἷόν ἐστι τοῖς ἡδυπαθοῦσιν ἡ om τρυφή, τοιοῦτό 
σοι τὸ ἐπὶ τῆς ὑποβαλλομένης καὶ ὑποπιπτούσης 
ὕλης ποιεῖν τὰ OLKELA τῇ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου κατασκευῇ: 
ἀπόλαυσιν γὰρ δεῖ ὑπολαμβάνειν πᾶν, ὃ ἔξεστι 
κατὰ τὴν ἰδίαν φύσιν ἐνεργεῖν. πανταχοῦ δὲ 
ἔξεστι. 

Τῷ μὲν οὖν κυλίνδρῳ οὐ πανταχοῦ δίδοται 
φέρεσθαι τὴν ἰδίαν κίνησιν οὐδὲ τῷ ὕδατι οὐδὲ 
πυρὶ οὐδὲ τοῖς ἄλλοις, ὅσα ὑπὸ φύσεως ἢ ψυχῆς 
ἀλόγου διοικεῖται: τὰ γὰρ διείργοντα καὶ ἐνιστά- 
μενα πολλά. νοῦς δὲ καὶ λόγος διὰ παντὸς τοῦ 
ἀντιπίπτοντος οὕτως πορεύεσθαι δύναται, ws 
πέφυκε καὶ ὡς θέλει. ταύτην τὴν ῥᾳστώνην 
πρὸ ὀμμάτων τιθέμενος, καθ᾽ ἣν ἐνεχθήσεται ὁ 
λόγος διὰ πάντων, ὡς πῦρ ἄνω, ὡς λίθος κάτω, ὡς 
κύλινδρος κατὰ πρανοῦς, μηκέτι μηδὲν ἐπεζήτει" 
τὰ γὰρ λοιπὰ ἐγκόμματα ἤτοι τοῦ σωματικοῦ 
ἐστι τοῦ νεκροῦ ἢ χωρὶς ὑπολήψεως καὶ τῆς 
αὐτοῦ τοῦ λόγου ἐνδόσεως οὐ θραύει οὐδὲ ποιεῖ 





1 νη, 32. 
2v. 29; x. 8 829, 


284 


BOOK X 


good man, but let anyone that shall form any such an 
idea of thee be as one that maketh a he. All this 
rests with thee. For who is there to hinder thee 
from being good and sincere!? Resolve then to 
live no longer if thou be not such.2 For neither 
doth Reason in that case insist that thou shouldest. 

33. Taking our ‘material’ into account, what can 
be said or done in the soundest way? Be it what it 
may, it rests with thee to do or say it. And Jet 
us have no pretence that thou art being hindered. 

Never shalt thou cease murmurmg until it be so 
with thee that the utilizing, in a manner consistent 
with the constitution of man, of the material pre- 
sented to thee and cast in thy way shall be to thee 
what indulgence is to the sensual. For everything 
must be accounted enjoyment that it is in a man’s 
power to put into practice in aecordance with his 
own nature; and it is everywhere in his power. 

A cylinder we know has no power given it of 
individual motion everywhere, nor has fire or water 
or any other thing controlled by Nature or by 
an irrational soul. Tor the interposing and impeding 
obstacles are many. But Intelligence and Reason 
make their way through every impediment just as 
their nature or their will prompts them. Setting 
before thine eyes this ease wherewith the Reason 
can force its way through every obstacle, as fire 
upwards, as a stone downwards, as a cylinder down a 
slope,* look for nothing beyond. For other hindrances 
either concern that veritable corpse, the body,* or, 
apart from imagination and the surrender of Reason 
herself, cannot crush us or work any harm at all.’ 


” Aul. Gell. vi 2), 8 11] (from Chiryvsippus) 
a 4]. ae hae 


285 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


κακὸν οὐδ᾽ ὁτιοῦν: ἐπεί τοι καὶ ὁ πάσχων αὐτὸ 
κακὸς ἂν εὐθὺς ἐγίνετο. 

Ἐπὶ γοῦν τῶν ἄλλων κατασκευασμάτων 
πάντων, ὅ τι ἂν κακόν τινε αὐτῶν συμβῇ, παρὰ 
τοῦτο χεῖρον γίνεται αὐτὸ τὸ πάσχον" ἐνταῦθα δέ, 
εἰ δεῖ εἰπεῖν, καὶ κρείττων γίνεται ὁ ἄνθρωπος 
καὶ ἐπαινετώτερος, ὀρθῶς χρώμενος τοῖς προσ- 
πίπτουσιν. ὅλως δὲ μέμνησο, ὅτι τὸν φύσει 
πολίτην οὐδὲν βλάπτει, ὃ πόλιν οὐ βλάπτει, 
οὐδέ γε πόλιν βλάπτει, ὃ νόμον οὐ βλάπτει' 
τούτων δὲ τῶν καλουμένων ἀκληρημάτων οὐδὲν 
βλάπτει νόμον. ὃ τοίνυν νόμον οὐ βλάπτει, οὔτε 
πόλιν οὔτε πολίτην. 

λδ΄, Τῷ δεδηγμένῳ ὑπὸ τῶν ἀληθῶν δογμάτων 
ἀρκεῖ καὶ τὸ βραχύτατον καὶ ἐν μέσῳ κείμενον 
εἰς ὑπόμνησιν ἀλνυπίας καὶ ἀφοβίας. οἷον 

“(φύλλα τὰ μέν τ᾽ ἄνεμος χαμάδις χέει, 
ὡς ἀνδρῶν γενεή.᾽ 


φυλλάρια δὲ καὶ τὰ τεκνία cov. φυλλάρια δὲ 

καὶ ταῦτα τὰ ἐπιβοῶντα ἀξιοπίστως καὶ ἐπευ- 

φημοῦντα ἢ ἐκ τῶν ἐναντίων καταρώμενα ἢ ἡσυχῇ 

ψέγοντα καὶ χλευάζοντα' φυλλάρια δὲ ὁμοίως καὶ 

τὰ διαδεξόμενα τὴν ὑστεροφημίαν. πάντα γὰρ 
7) ὔ 

oeuis ““ξαρος ἐπιγίγνεται Opn 

εἶτα ἄνεμος καταβέβληκεν: ἔπειθ᾽ ὕλη ἕτερα 

ἀντὶ τούτων φύει. τὸ δὲ ὀλιγοχρόνιον κοινὸν 
“Ὁ 3 

πᾶσιν. ἀλλὰ σὺ πάντα, ὡς αἰώνια ἐσόμενα, 








1vui. 58. 2 x. 6 ὁ Hom, 4. vi. 147. 
286 


BOOK X 


Else indeed would their victiin at once become 
bad, 

In fact in the case of all other organisms, if any 
evil happen to any of them, the victim itself becomes 
the worse for it. But a man so circumstanced 
becomes, if I may so say, better and more praise- 
worthy by putting such contingencies to a right use.! 
In fine, remember that nothing that harms not the 
city can harm him whom Nature has made a citizen?; 
nor yet does that harm a city which harms not law. 
But not one of the so-called mischances harms law. 
What does not harm law, then, does no harm to 
citizen or city. 

34. Even an obvious and quite brief aphorism can 
serve to warn him that is bitten with the true 
doctrines against giving way to grief and fear; as for 
instance, 


Such are the races of men as the leaves that the nind 
seallers earthwards.3 


And thy children too are little leaves. Leaves also 
they who make an outcry as if they ought to be 
listened to, and scatter their praises or, coutrariwise, 
their curses, or blume and scoff in secret. Leaves 
too they that are to hand down our after-fame. 
For all these things 


ὃ" ‘ , ᾿ . * ῃ , YY; Υ 4 . 
Burgeon again with the season of spring * ; 


anon the wind hath cast them down,® and the 
forest puts forth others in their stead.  Trans- 
itoriness is the common lot of all things, yet there is 
none of these that thou huntest not after or shunnest, 


+ Lhid. > cp Psalm 103 16, 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


φεύγεις καὶ διώκεις. μικρὸν καὶ καταμύσεις' 
τὸν δὲ ἐξενεγκόντα σε ἤδη ἄλλος θρηνήσει. 

Ae. Τὸν ὑγιαίνοντα ὀφθαλμὸν πάντα ὁρᾶν 
δεῖ τὰ ὁρατὰ καὶ μὴ λέγειν, “ τὰ χλωρὰ θέλω." 
τοῦτο γὰρ ὀφθαλμιῶντός ἐστι. καὶ τὴν ὑγιαίν- 
ουσαν ἀκοὴν καὶ ὄσφρησιν εἰς πάντα δεῖ τὰ 
ὠκουστὰ καὶ ὀσφραντὰ ἑτοίμην εἶναι. καὶ τὸν 
ὑγιαίνοντα στόμαχον πρὸς πάντα τὰ τρόφιμα 
ὁμοίως ἔχειν, ὡς μύλην πρὸς πάντα, ὅσα ἀλχέσουσα 
κατεσκεύασται. καὶ τοίνυν τὴν ὑγιαίνουσαν 
διάνοιαν πρὸς πάντα δεῖ τὰ συμβαίνοντα ἑτοίμην 
εἶναι: 7 dé λέγουσα, “Ta τεκνία σωξέσθω," 
καὶ “πάντες, ὅ τι ἂν πράξω, ἐπαινείτωσαν,, 
ὀφθαλμός ἐστι τὰ χλωρὰ ζητῶν ἢ ὀδόντες τὰ 
ἁπαλά. 

AS. Οὐδείς ἐστιν οὕτως εὔποτμος, ᾧ ἀπο- 
θνήσκοντι οὐ παρεστήξονταί τινες ἀσπαζόμενοι τὸ 
συμβαῖνον κακόν. σπουδαῖος καὶ σοφὸς ἣν" [μὴ] 
τὸ πανύστατον ἔσται τις ὁ καθ᾽ αὑτὸν λέγων" 
" ᾿Αναπνεύσομέν ποτε ἀπὸ τούτου τοῦ παιδαγωγοῦ. 
χαλεπὸς μὲν οὐδενὶ ἡμῶν ἣν, ἀλλὰ - ἠσθανόμην, 
ὅτι ἡσυχῇ καταγινώσκει, ἡμῶν. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν 
ἐπὶ τοῦ σπουδαίου. ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν δὲ πόσα ἄλλα ἐστί, 
δι ἃ πολὺς ὁ ἀπαλλακτιῶν ἡμῶν. τοῦτο οὖν 
ἐμνοήσεις ἀποθνήσκων καὶ εὐκολώτερον ἐξελεύσῃ 
λογιζόμενος" ἐκ τοιούτου βίου ἀπέρχομαι, ἐν ᾧ 
αὐτοὶ οἱ KOLVWYOL, ὑπὲρ ὧν τὰ τοσαῦτα ἠγωνισάμην, 
ηὐξάμην, ἐφρόντισα, αὐτοὶ ἐκεῖνοι ἐθέλουσί με 
ὑπάγειν ἄλλην τινὰ τυχὸν ἐκ τούτου ῥᾳστώνην 





1 ν, 48. 
βι, 8; vu 41; vill. 49; ix. 40; χι. 34 Marcus was in- 
tensely fond of his children. Galen describes (xiv. 3, Kuhn) 


288 


BOOK NX 


as though it were everlasting. A little while and 
thou sh alt close thine eyes; aye, and for him that 
bore thee to the grave shall another presently raise 
the dirge.! 

35, ‘Phe sound eve should see all there is to be 
seen, but should not say: / want mhat is green only, 
For that is characteristic of a disordered eye — And 
the sound hearmg and smell should be equipped tor 
wll that is to be heard or smelled. And the sound 
digestion should act towards all nutmment as a mill 
towards the grist which it was formed to grind. So 
should the sound mind be ready for all that befalls 
But the mind that says: fel my children be safel? Let 
all applaud my every act fis but as an eye Uhat looks 
for green things or as teeth that look for soft things 

36. There is no one so fortunate as not Lo have 
one or two standing by his death-bed whe will 
welcome the evil which is befalling him. Say he 
was a worthy man and a wise : ΜΕ Lhere not be 
some one at the very end to say im Ins heart, /Ve 
can breathe ugain al last, freed | Irom this schoolmaster, 
nol that he was hard on any of us, but fo was all 
along conscious that he taciiy condenns ws? So 00} 
for the worthy, but in our own case how many 
other reasons can be found tor whieh hundreds 
would be only too glad to be quit of us! Think 
then upon this When dying, and thy passing from 
life will be easier if thou reason thus: I am leaving 
a life in which even my intimates for whom 1 have 
so greatly toiled, prayed, and thought,' aye even 
they wish me gone, expecting belike to gain ‘there Dy 


his anxiety about Commodus; ep. also Fronto, ad Cres 
iv. 19. ἡ ep. Vopiseas, ΠῚ A προίκα, 87, $3 τ Nen ee 
+ Herodian, 1. 4, ὃ 3 


28y 


MARCUS ACRELIUS 


ἐλπίξοντες. τί ἂν οὖν τις ἀντέχοιτο τῆς ἐνταῦθα 
μακροτέρας διατριβῆς; 

Μὴ μέντοι διὰ τοῦτο ἔλαττον εὐμενὴς αὐτοῖς 
ἄπιθι, ἀλλὰ τὸ ἴδιον ἔθος διασώζων φίλος καὶ 
εὔνους καὶ ἵλεως: καὶ μὴ πάλιν ὡς ἀποσπώμενος, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ ἐπὶ τοῦ εὐθανατοῦντος εὐκόλως TO 
ψυχάριον ἀπὸ τοῦ σώματος ἐξειλεῖται, τοιαύτην 
καὶ τὴν ἀπὸ τούτων ἀποχώρησιν δεῖ γενέσθαι" 
καὶ ,γὰρ τούτοις ἡ φύσις «σε; συνῆψε καὶ 
συνέκρινεν. ἀχλὰ νῦν διαλύει. διαλύομαι ὡς 
ἀπὸ οἰκείων μέν, οὐ μὴν ἀνθελκόμενος, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἀβιάστως" ἕν γὰρ καὶ τοῦτο τῶν κατὰ φύσιν. 

λζ΄. "E@icov ἐπὶ παντός, ὡς οἷόν τε, τοῦ 
πρασσομένου ὑπό τινος ἐπιζητεῖν κατὰ σαυτόν" 
“Οὗτος τοῦτο ἐπὶ τί ἀναφέρει; ἄρχου δὲ ἀπὸ 
σαυτοῦ, καὶ σαυτὸν πρῶτον ἐξέταξε. 

My “Μέμνησο, ὅτι τὸ νευροσπαστοῦν ἐστιν 
ἐκεῖνο τὸ ἔνδον ἐγκεκρυμμένον' ἐκεῖνο ῥητορεία," * 
ἐκεῖνο ζωή, ἐκεῖνο, εἰ δεῖ εἰπεῖν, ἄνθρωπος. 

μηδέποτε συμπεριφαντάξου τὸ περικείμενον ἀγγει- 

does καὶ τὰ ὀργάνια ταῦτα τὰ περιπεπλασμένα. 
ὅμοια γάρ ἐστι σκεπάρνῳ, μόνον διαφέροντα, 
καθότι προσφυῆ ἐστιν. ἐπεί τοῦ οὐ μᾶλλόν Te 
τούτων ὄφελός ἐστι τῶν μορίων χωρὶς τῆς 
κινούσης καὶ ἰσχούσης αὐτὰ αἰτίας ἢ τῆς κερκίδος 
τῇ ὑφαντρίᾳ, καὶ τοῦ καλάμου τῷ γράφοντι, καὶ 
τοῦ μαστιγίου τῷ ἡνιόχῳ. 


1 ῥητορία A. Perhaps ἱστορία. 


290 


BOOK X 


sume further ease.) Why then should anyone cline 
to u longer sojourn here fF 

ον θεῖ go away with no less hindliness towards 
thean on this account, but maintaining thy true char- 
acteristics be friendly and goudnatured and QLACIOUS 5 
nor again as though wrenched part, bat rather 
should: thy withdrawal from them be as that gentle 
slipping away of suul froin body which we see “when 
ἃ man makes a peaceful end. For it was Nature 
that knit and kneaded thee with them, and now she 
parts the tie. 1 am parted from kinstolk, not 
dragged formbly away, but unresistingly For this 
severance too is a process of Nature.’ 

In every ach of another habitaate thyself as 
far as may be to put lo thyself the question: Nhat 
end has the man in view?’ But begin with thyself, 
cross-examine thyself first. 

38, Bear in mind that what pulls the strings 1s 
that Hidden Thing withm us: ἐδώ! makes our 
speech, that our lite, thai, one may say, makes the 
man Never in thy men tal picture of it include the 
vessel that overlies it? nor these organs that are 
appurtenances thereof. They are like the workman’s 
adze, only differing from it in bemg  natarally 
attached to the body. Since indeed, severed from 
the Cause that bids them move and bids them stay, 
these parts are as useless as is the shuttle of the 
weaver, the pen of the writer, and the whip of the 


charioteer. 


1 Ts he thinking of Commoedus Ὁ me es 
San 16. 4. Sad fines χὰ 1. 


to 


ΒΙΒΛΙΟΝ IA 


a. Ta ἴδια τῆς λογικῆς ψυχῆς" ἑαυτὴν ὁρῶ, 
ἑαυτὴν διαρθροῖ, ἑαυτήν, ὁποίαν ἂν βούληται, 
ποιεῖ, τὸν καρπὸν ὺν φέρει αὐτὴ καρποῦται 
——TOUS γὰρ τῶν φυτῶν καρποὺς καὶ τὸ ἀνάλογον 
ἐπὶ τῶν ζώων ἄλλοι καρποῦνται,---τοῦ ἰδίου 
τέλους τυγχάνει, ὅπου ἂν τὸ τοῦ βίου πέρας 
dl 
ἐπιστῆ. οὐχ᾽ ὥσπερ ἐπὶ ὀρχήσεως καὶ ὑποκρίσ- 
εως, καὶ τῶν τοιούτων, ἀτελὴς γίνεται ἡ ὅλη) 
πρᾶξις, ἐάν τι ἐγκόψῃ" ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ παντὸς μέρους, 
καὶ ὅπου ἂν καταληφθῇ, πλῆρες καὶ ἀπροσδεὲς 
ἑαυτῇ τὸ προτεθὲν ποιεῖ, ὥστε εἰπεῖν, “ἐγὼ 
ἀπέχω τὰ ἐμά." 

"Ere δὲ περιέρχεται τὸν ὅλον κόσμον, καὶ τὸ 
περὶ αὐτὸν κενόν, καὶ τὸ σχῆμα αὐτοῦ, καὶ εἰς 
τὴν ἀπειρίαν τοῦ αἰῶνος ἐκτείνεται, καὶ τὴν 
περιοδικὴν παλιγγενεσίαν τῶν ὅλων ἐμπεριλαμ- 
βάνει καὶ περινοεῖ, καὶ θεωρεῖ ὅτι οὐδὲν νεώ- 
τερον ὄψονται οἱ μεθ' ἡμᾶς οὐδὲ περιττότερον 
εἶδον οἱ πρὸ ἡμῶν: ἀλλὰ «Τρόπον. τινὰ ὁ τεσσαρα- 
κοντούτης, ἐὰν νοῦν ὁποσονοῦν ἔχῃ; πάντα 
τὰ γεγονότα καὶ τὰ ἐσόμενα ἑώρακε κατὰ τὸ 
τι, 83 vni. 35. cp. Epict. i. 17, § 1. 


ep. Rpiet. i, 19, 811: γέγονε τὸ ζῷον ὥστε αὑτοῦ ἕνεκα 
πάντα ποιεῖν. 3 xii. 36. 


292 


BOOK. ΧΙ 


Ι. Ture properties of the Rational Soul are these: 
it sees itself, dissects itself, moulds riself to its own 
will,! itself reaps its own frurts -—whereas the fruits 
of the vegetable kingdom and the corresponding 
produce of animals are reaped by others,—it wins 
to its own goal wherever the bounds of hfe be set. 
In dancing and acting and such-lke aits, if any 
break occurs, the whole action is rendered imperfect ; 
but the rational soul in every part and wheresoever 
taken? shews the worl set before it fulfilled and all- 
sufficrent for itself, so that it can say: 1 have to the 
full what ws my own. 

More than this, it goeth about the whole Universe 
and the void surrounding it and traces its plan, and 
stretches forth into the infimtude of Tine, and 
comprehends the cyclical Regeneration | of all things, 
and takes stock of it, and diseerns that our children 
will see nothing fresh,*> just as our fathers too never 
saw anything more than we.’ So that in a manner 
the man of forty vears, if he have a grain of sense, 
in view of this sameness has seen all that has been 


ἐν 15, 32: χα 7, ἢ 9, νι, B73 via] ete. 
Ἢ ai | ν᾿ ω Ἐπ > / 1 mn Ἵ 
ep, ἴϑιον, ἢ Ογδὃ : cadem sigd omic με}. Florio's 
Montaigne, 1 10. “If you have lived one day you have seene 
all.” 


205 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ὁμοειδές. ἴδιον δὲ “λογικῆς ψυχῆς καὶ τὸ φιλεῖν 
τοὺς πλησίον καὶ ἀλήθεια καὶ αἰδὼς καὶ τὸ 
μηδὲν ἑαυτῆς προτιμᾶν, ὅπερ ἴδιον καὶ νόμου. 
οὕτως ἄρ᾽ οὐδὲν διήνεγκε λόγος ὀρθὸς καὶ λόγος 
δικαιοσύνης. 

3: ᾿Ωιδῆς ἐπιτερποῦς καὶ ὀρχήσεως καὶ 
παγκρατίου καταφρονήσεις, ἐὰν τὴν μὲν μὰς 
φωνὴν καταμερίσῃς εἰς ἕκαστον τῶν $6 όγγων, 
καὶ καθ᾽ ἕνα πύθῃ σεαυτοῦ, «Bye TOUTOU ἥττων εἶν 
διατραπήσῃ γάρ' ἐπὶ δὲ “ὀρχήσεως τὸ ἀνάλογον 
ποιήσας καθ᾽ ἑκάστην κίνησιν ἢ σχέσιν' τὸ δ᾽ 
αὐτὸ καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ παγκρατίου. ὅλως οὗν, χωρὶς 
ἀρετῆς καὶ τῶν ἀπ᾽ ἀρετῆς, μέμνησο ἐπὶ τὰ κατὰ 
μέρος τρέχειν καὶ τῇ διαιρέσει αὐτῶν εἰς 
καταφρόνησιν ἰέναι" τὸ δ᾽ αὐτὸ καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν βίον 
ὅλον μετάφερε. 

γ. Ota ἐστὶν ἡ ψυχὴ ἡ ἕτοιμος, ἐὰν ἤδη 
ἀπολυθῆναι δέῃ τοῦ σώματος καὶ ἤτοι σβεσθῆναι 
ἢ σκεδασθῆναι ἢ συμμεῖναι. τὸ δὲ ἕτοιμον 
τοῦτο, ἵνα ἀπὸ ἰδικῆς κρίσεως ἔρχηται, μὴ κατὰ 
ψιλὴν παράταξιν, [ὡς οἱ Χριστιανοί, 1 ἀλλὰ 
λελογισμένως, καὶ σεμνῶς, καὶ ὥστε καὶ ἄλλον 
πεῖσαι, ἀτραγῴδως. 

δ΄, Πεποίηκά τι κοινωνικῶς; οὐκοῦν opérnuat. 
τοῦτο ἵνα ἀεὶ πρόχειρον ἀπαντᾷ, κἀὶ μηδαμοῦ 
παύου. 

ε΄, Τίς σου ἡ τέχνη; “᾿Αγαθὸν εἶναι." τοῦτο δὲ 


1 ὡς οἱ Χριστιανοί ungranimatical and pretty certainly a 
gloss. Seep 38 ff 


LU St. Mark vin. 36. 
ὁ A rather brutal combination of boxing and wrestling. 
* vin. 36 


294 





BOOK ΣΙ 


and shall be. Again a property of the Rational 
Soul is the love of our neighbour, aud truthfulness, 
and medesty, and to prize nothing above itself1— 
a characteristic also of Law. In this way then the 
Reason that is right reason and the Reason that is 
justice are one. 

2. Thou wilt think but meanly of charming songs 
and dances and the pancratium,’ if thou analyze 
the melodious utterance into its several notes and in 
the case of each ask thyself: Has this the mastery 
over me’ For thou wilt recoil from such a cen- 
fession.2 So too with the dance, if thou do the like 
for each movement and posture The same holds 
good of the pancratium In fine, virtue and its 
sphere of action excepted, remeinber to turn to the 
component parts,t and by analyzing them come to 
despise them. Bring the same practice to bear on 
the whole of life also. 

3. What a soul is that which is ready to be 
released from the body at any requisite moment, 
and be quenched’ or dissipated or hold together! 
But the readiness must spring from a man’s inner 
judgment, and not be the result of mere opposition 
fas is the case with the Christians]." It must be 
associated with deliberation and dignity and, if 
others too are to be convinced, with nothmg 
like stage-heroics. 

4. Have I done some social act? Well, 1 am 
amply rewarded.’ Keep this truth ever ready to 
turn to, and in no wise slacken thine efforts. 

5. What is thy vocation? Zo be a good man. 


+ ait Ve Baa Vil ae: δ See p. 382. 
vn 18, 735 1x. 42, $55 cg. Prov x. 17: τῇ ψυγῇ αὐτοῦ 
ἀγαθὸν ποιεῖ avip ἐλεήμων, 


295 


. 


2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


TOS καλῶς γίνεται ἢ ἐκ θεωρημάτων, τῶν μὲν 
περὶ τῆς τοῦ ὅλου φύσεως, τῶν δὲ περὶ τῆς ἰδίας 
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου κατασκευῆς; 

ἐξ Πρῶτον αἱ τραγῳδίαι παρήχθησαν ὑπο- 
μνηστικαὶ τῶν συμβαινόντων καὶ ὃ ὅτι ταῦτα οὕτω 
πέφυκε γίνεσθαι καὶ ὅτι, οἷς ἐπὶ τῆς σκηνῆς 
ψυχαγωγεῖσθε, τούτοις μὴ ἄχθεσθε ἐπὶ τῆς 
μείζονος σκηνῆς. ὁρᾶται γάρ, ὅτι οὕτω δεῖ ταῦτα 
περαίνεσθαι καὶ ὅτι φέρουσιν αὐτὰ καὶ οἱ 
κεκραγότες, ‘le Κιθαιρὼν." καὶ λέγεται δέ 
τινα ὑπὸ τῶν τὰ δρώματα ποιούντων χρησίμως, 
οἷόν ἐστιν ἐκεῖνο μάλεστα' 

“Be δ᾽ ἠἡμελήθην ἐκ θεῶν καὶ παῖδ᾽ ἐμώ, 

ἔχει λόγον καὶ τοῦτο" 

καὶ πάλιν' 

“Tots πράγμασιν γὰρ οὐχὶ θυμοῦσθαι" 
καὶ 

“ Biov θερίζειν ὥστε κώάρπιμον στάχυν" " 

ρ prripov στάχ 

καὶ ὅσα τοιαῦτα. 

Μετὰ δὲ τὴν τραγῳδίαν ἡ ἀρχαία κωμῳδία 
παρήχθη, παιδαγωγικὴν παρρησίαν ἔχουσα, καὶ 
τῆς ἀτυφίας οὐκ ἀχρήστως δι᾽ αὐτῆς τῆς εὐθυρ- 
ρημοσύνης ὑπομι VIO KOUTA," πρὸς οἷον τι καὶ 
Διογένης ταυτὶ i παρελάμβανεν. μετὰ ταύτην Ἰδὲ» 
ἡ μέση κωμῳδία, καὶ λοιπὸν ἡ νέα πρὸς τί ποτε 
παρείληπται, ἣ κατ᾽ ὀλίγον ἐπὶ τὴν ἐκ μιμήσεως 
φιλοτεχνίαν ὑπερρύη, ἐπίστησον. ὅτι μὲν γὰρ 

1 παύτης A: ταῦτα τις ᾿ ταύτην Stich. + «- δὲ Ξ- Schenkl. 

1 Soph. Oed. Rev 1391; Κριοῦ. α 24,816. Perhaps Marcus 
had in mind the lines of Pimocles (Athen, vi. 2) πρὸς ἀλλοτρίῳ 


τε ψυχαγωγηθεὶς πάθει Me? ἡδονῆς ἀπῆλθε παιδευθεὶς ἅμα, 
2 Kur. αἰ ομρ Frag. 2073 vn. 41]. 


296 


BOOK Al 


Bat how θὲ successful in this save by assured 
conceptions on the one hand of the Universal 
Nature and on the other of the special constitution 
of man ἢ 

6. Originally tragedies were brought on to remind 
us of real events, and that such things naturally 
vecur, and that on life’s greater stage vou must 
not be vexed at things, which on the stage you 
tind so attractive For it is seen that these things 
must be gone through, and they too have to endive 
them, who cry Ah, Kithaeron 1} Aye, and the 
dramatic writers contain some serviceable savings 
For example this more especially : 


Though both my sons and me the gods have spurned, 
For this too there ts reason , 

and again: 
Tt nought avarleth ta be mwroth with things ;° 


and this: 


Our lees are reaped lhe the ripe ears af corn 34 


and how many more hke them. 

And atter Tragedy the old Comedy was put on the 
stage, exercising an educative freedom of speech, and 
by ils very directness of utterance givmge us no 
unserviceable warning against μὴ μα! arrogance, 
In somewhak similar vein Diogenes’ also took up 
this role. After this, consider for w hat purpose 
the Middle Comedy was introduced, and subse- 
quently the New, which httle by little degenerated 
mto ingenious inmicry — For that some serviceable 

* Kur. Bedlea. Fiag 2805 va 38 
Waa. Flys Wrage 757. sn [0 
Dios Laer hoy 7 


ot ὡς 


297 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


λέγεται καὶ ὑπὸ τούτων τινὰ χρήσιμα, οὐκ 
ἀγνοεῖται" ἀλλὰ ἡ ὅλη ἐπιβολὴ τῆς "Τοιαύτης 
ποιήσεως καὶ δραματουργίας πρὸς τίνα ποτὲ 
σκοπὸν ἀπέβλεψεν; 

ζ΄. Πῶς ἐναργὲς προσπίπτει τὸ μὴ εἶναι 
ἄλλην βίου ὑπόθεσιν εἰς τὸ φιλοσοφεῖν οὕτως 
ἐπιτήδειον, ὡς ταύτην, ἐν ἡ νῦν OY τυγχάνεις. 
ῃ΄. Κλάδος τοῦ προσεχοῦς κλάδον ἀποκοπεὶς 
οὐ δύναται μὴ καὶ τοῦ ὅλου φυτοῦ ἀποκεκόφθαι. 
οὕτω δὴ καὶ ἄνθρωπος ἑνὸς ἀνθρώπου ἀποσχισθ- 
εὶς ὅλης τῆς κοινωνίας ἀποπέπτωκεν. κλάδον 
μὲν οὖν ἄλλος ἀποκόπτει" ἄνθρωπος δὲ αὐτὸς 
ἑαυτὸν τοῦ πλησίον χωρίζει μισήσας καὶ 
ἀποστραφείς" ὠγνοεῖ δέ, ὅτι καὶ τοῦ ὅλου 
πολιτεύματος ἅμα ἀποτέτμηκεν ἑαυτόν. πλὴν 
ἐκεῖνό γε δῶρον τοῦ συστησαμένου τὴν κοινωνίαν 
Δίος: ἔξεστι γὰρ πάλιν ἡμῖν συμφῦναι τῷ 
προσεχεῖ καὶ πάλιν τοῦ ὅλου συμπληρωτικοῖς 
γενέσθαι. πλεονάκις μέντοι γινόμενον τὸ κατὰ 
τὴν τοιαύτην διαίρεσιν δυσένωτον καὶ δυσαπο- 
κατάστατον «τὸν» ἀποχωροῦν ποιεῖ. ὅλως τε 
οὐχ ὅμοιος ὁ κλάδος ὁ o ar ἀρχῆς συμβλαστήσας 
καὶ σύμπνους συμμείνας τῷ μετὰ τὴν ἀποκοπὴν 
αὖθις ἐγκεντρισθέντι, ὃ τί ποτε λέγουσιν οἱ 
φυτουργοί. ὁμοθαμνεῖν μέν, μὴ ὁμοδογμα- 
τεῖν δέ. 

θ΄. Οἱ ἐνιστάμενοι προιόντε cot κατὰ τὸν 
ὀρθὸν λόγον, ὥσπερ ἀπὸ τῆς ὑγιοῦς πράξεως 


1 Lucian, de Salt. 35, says of the Art of Dancing (Panto- 
mime} that it requires the acme of culture and even of 
plulosophy ! 

Zep, Lucan it 498: “exeat aula qui vult esse pius”’; 








298 


BOOK XI 


things are said even by the writers of these is 
recognized by all. But what end in view had 
this whole enterprize of such poetical and dramatic 
composition ¢ 4 

τ. How clearly is it borne m on thee that there is 
no other state of life so fitted to call for the 
exercise of Philosophy as this in which thou now 
findest thyself” 

8. A branch cut off froin its neighbour branch 5 
cannot but be cut off from the whole plant. In the 
very same way aman severed from one man has fallen 
away from the fellowship of all men Now a branch 
is cut off by others, but a man separates himself # 
from his neighbour by his own agency in hating him 
or turning his back upon him ; and 1s unaware that 
he has thereby sundered himself from the whole 
civic community.” But mark the gift of Zeus who 
established the law of fellowship. For it is in our 
power to grow again to the neighbour branch, and 
again become perfective of the whole. But such a 
schism constantly repeated makes it ditheult for 
the seceding part to unite again and resume its 
former condition. And in general the branch that 
from the first has shared in the growth of the tree 
and lived with its life is not like that which has been 
cut off and afterwards grafted on to it, as the 
gardeners are apt to tell you. Be of one bush, but 
not of one mind. 

9, As those who withstand thy progress along the 
path of right reason will never be able to turn thee 


Montaigne ui. 9 (Florio’s version): ὁ Plato saith that who 
escapes untainted and clean-handed from the mauaging of the 
world escapeth by some wondet 7” See also «hore vin. | 

3st Paul, Rom τὰ 19, ἔν, 295 vin Bk Ope 90 


299 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


3 / 2 / ch \ a“ 
ἀποτρέψαι σε ov δυνήσονται, οὕτως μηδὲ τῆς 
/ / 
πρὸς αὐτοὺς εὐμενείας ἐκκρουέτωσαν' ἀλλὰ 
τ ,ὔὕ 
φύλασσε σεαυτὸν ἐπ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων ὁμοίως, μὴ 
͵ οὶ ἴω 7 Ν 
μόνον ἐπὶ τῆς εὐσταθοῦς κρίσεως καὶ πράξεως, 
Ν a / - 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς πρὸς τοὺς κωλύειν ἐπιχειροῦντας 
3 7 7 
ἢ ἄλλως δυσχεραίνοντας πρᾳότητος. καὶ γὰρ 
»"» 2 , ta) 
τοῦτο ἀσθενές, TO χαλεπαίνειν αὐτοῖς, ὥσπερ TO 
to “a 7 \ “A 
ἀποστῆναι τῆς πράξεως καὶ ἐνδοῦναι κατα- 
/ \ / 

““λαγέντα: ἀμφότεροι yap ἐπίσης λειποτάκ ral, ὁ 
Ν ¢ f e δὲ 3 Ν \ Ν ‘ 
μὲν ὑποτρέσας, ὁ δὲ ἀλλοτριωθεὶς πρὸς τὸν φύσει 

“A \ , 
συγγενῆ καὶ φίλον. 
7 ‘ce O > ἢ ΄ 10 / ? / 5} Ὶ 
bs UK ἔστι χείρων οὐδεμία φυσις τέχνης. 
¢ 7 ἊΝ 
καὶ γὰρ αἱ τέχναι τὰς φύσεις μιμοῦνται. εἰ δὲ 
τοῦτο, ἡ πασῶν τῶν ἄλλων τελεωτάτη καὶ 
f 3 
TEPLANTTLKWTATH φύσις οὐκ ἂν ὠπολείποιτο 
“ n / 
τῆς τεχνικῆς εὐμηχανίας. πᾶσαι δέ γε τέχναι 
an / f ~ “ 
TOV κρειττόνων ἕνεκεν TA χείρω ποιοῦσιν" οὐκοῦν 
\ / A / 
καὶ ἡ κοινὴ φύσις. καὶ δὴ ἔνθεν μὲν γένεσις 
΄ \ 
δικαιοσύνης, ἀπὸ δὲ ταύτης αἱ λοιπαὶ ἀρεταὶ 
\ 
ὑφίστανται: ov yap τηρηθήσεται TO δίκαιον, ἐὰν 
, Ν \ ΄ ᾿ 
ἤτοι διαφερώμεθα πρὸς τὰ μέσα ἢ εὐεξαπάτητοι 
καὶ προπτωτικοὶ καὶ μεταπτωτικοὶ ὦμεν. 
? 17 \ 3 9 \ ” wf ’ \ \ ) 
ta. Et μὲν οὖν" «μὴ ἔρχεται ἔπι σὲ τὰ 
7 Γ , 4 \ a | 
πράγματα, ὧν αἱ διώξεις καὶ φυγαὶ GopuBovai ce, 
ἀλλὰ τρόπον τινὰ αὐτὸς ἐπ᾽ ἐκεῖνα ἔρχῃ, τὸ γοῦν 
κρῖμα τὸ περὶ αὐτῶν ἡσυχαζέτω κἀκεῖνα μενεῖ 
ἀτρεμοῦντα καὶ οὔτε διώκων οὔτε φεύγων ὀφθήσῃ. 


! Apparently a quotation from some unknown poet. 
2 οὐκ PAA. [εἰ μὲν} Οὐκ Leopold. 


300 


BOOK ΧΙ 


aside from sound action, so let them not wrest thee 
from a kindly attitude towards them’; bat keep a 
watch over thyself m= beth directions alike, not only 
in steadfastness 2 of judgment and action but also in 
gentleness towards those who endeavour to stand 
in thy path or be in some other way a thorn in thy 
side. Forin fact it isa sign of weakness to Le wroth 
with them, no less than to shrink from action and 
be terrified urto surrender. For they that do the 
one or the other are alike deserters of their post,” 
the one as a coward, the other as estranged from a 
natural kinsman and friend. 

10. ‘ Nate in no case cometh short of art’ For 
indeed the arts are copiers of various natures. If 
this be so, the most constmmate and comprehensive 
Nature ae all cannot be outdone by the mventive 
skill of art. And in every art the lower thines 
are done for the sake of the higher+; and this 
must hold good of the Universal Nature also. Aye 
and thence is the origin of Justice, and in justice all 
the other virtues have their root,” since justice will 
not be maintained if we either put a value on 
things indifferent, or are easily duped and prone to 
slip and prone to change. 

Ll. If therefore the “things, the following after and 
eschewing of which disturb thee, come not to thee, 
but thou in a manner dost thyself seek them out, 
at all events keep thy judgment at rest about them 
and they will remain quiescent, and thou shalt not 
be seen following after or eschewing them. 


ix es $2 ete. “v.18. & ye 96, 
+ vy, 16, 30; ue 50. 
Y LV. 27 Ns Cp Theognis, 147: ἐν δὲ δικαιοσύνῃ συλ- 


λήβδην πᾶσ᾽ eer στιν. 


301 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Toke Lpaipu ψυχῆς αὐτοειδής, ὅταν μήτε 
ἐκτείνηται ἐπί τι μήτε ἔσω συντρεχῃ, μήτε 
σπείρηται ἮΝ μήτε συνιζάώνῃ, ἀλλὰ φωτὶ λάμπ- 
ται, ᾧ τὴν ἀλήθειαν ὁρᾷ τὴν πάντων καὶ τὴν 


ἐ 
ἴω 


ἐν αὑτῇ. 

iy. Καταφρονῆσει μού τις; ὄψεται: ἐγὼ δὲ 
ὄψομαι, ἵνα μή τι καταφρονήσεως ἄξιον πράσσων 
ἢ λέγων εὑρίσκωμαι. μισήσει; ὄψεται' ἀλλὰ 
ἐγὼ εὐμενὴς καὶ εὔνους παντί, καὶ τούτῳ αὐτῷ 
ἕτοιμος τὸ παρορώμενον δεῖξαι, οὐκ ὀνειδιστικῶς 
οὐδὲ ὡς κατεπιδεικνύμενος, ὅτι ἀνέχομαι, ἀλλὰ 
γνησίως καὶ χρηστῶς, οἷος ὁ Φωκίων ἐ ἐκεῖνος, εἴ 
γε μὴ προσεποιεῖτο. τὰ ἔσω γὰρ δεῖ τοιαῦτα 
εἶναι, καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν βλέπεσθαι ἄνθρωπον 
πρὸς μηδὲν ἀγανακτικῶς διατιθέμενον μηδὲ 
δεινοπαθοῦντα. τί γάρ σοι κακὸν, εἰ αὐτὸς νῦν 
ποιεῖς τὸ τῇ φύσει σου οἰκεῖον καὶ δέχῃ τὸ νῦν 
τῇ τῶν ὅλων φύσει εὔκαιρον, ἄνθρωπος τεταμένος 
πρὸς τὸ γίνεσθαι Sv ὅτου δὴ τὸ κοινῇ συμφέρον; 

ἐδ΄. ᾿Αλλήλων καταφρονοῦντες ἀλλήλοις 
ἀρεσκεύονται καὶ ἀλλήλων ὑπερέχειν θέλοντες 
ἀλλήλοις ὑποκατακλίνονται. 

te’. Ὥς σαπρὸς καὶ κίβδηλος ὁ λέγων, “γὼ 
προήρημαι ἁπλῶς σοι προσφέρεσθαι." τί ποιεῖς, 
ἄνθρωπε; τοῦτο οὐ δεῖ προλέγειν. αὐτοῦ φανὴσ- 
eva ἐπὶ τοῦ μετώπου γεγράφθαι ὀφείλει, εὐθὺς 


1 αὐτοτελὴς Reiske. 2 ἐπαίρηται Schenk. 





1 viii. 41 ; xii. 3. 2 vin. 51. 

ὄν, 95: Ἐρίοῦ. iii. 18, 89; x. 32. + x1. 18, § 

5 Marcus is pr obably thinking of Phocion’ s ns words, see 
Aehan xii. 49 μηδὲν ᾿Αθηναίοις μνησικακήσειν ὑπὲρ ris Tap’ 
αὐτῶν φιλοτησίας ἧς νῦν πίνω (sc. the cup of hemlock); but 


302 


BOOK XI 


{2. The soul is ‘x sphere truly shaped,’ + when it 
neither projects itself towards anything outside ior 
shrinks together mwardly, neither “‘expunds nor 
contracts,- ‘but irradiates a light whereby it sees the 
reality of all things aud the reality that is in itself, 

13. Whatif aman think scorn of me’ That will 
be his affair. But it will be mine not to be found 
doing or saying anything worthy of scorn. But what 
if he hate me? That will be his affair." Bat 1 will 
be kindly and goodnatured to everyone, and ready 
to shew even my enemy where he has seen amiss, 
not by way of rebuke + nor with a parade of for- 
bearance, but genuinely and chivalrously like the 
famous Phocion,’ unless indeed he was speaking 
ironically. For such should be the inner springs of a 
man’s heart " that the Gods see him not wrathfully 
disposed at any thing or counting it a hardship. 
What evil can happen to thee if thou thyself now 
doest what is congenial to thy nature, and welcomest 
what the Universal Nature now deems well- timed, 
thou who art a man intensely eager that what is for 
the conimon interest should by one means or another 
be brought about ὃ 

14. Thinking scorn of one another, they yet fawn 
on one another, and eager to outdo their rivals they 
grovel one to another. 

15. How rotten at the core is he, how counterfeit, 
who proclaims aloud: 1 have elected to deal straight- 
Jorwardly nith thee! Man, what art thou at? There 
is no need to give this out. The fact will instantly 
declare itself. It ought to be written on the fore- 


Heylbut (fhe. Mus. 39. p. 310) refers to a story in Musonius 


Rufus, p 55, Hense. 
® cp. St. Luke xi. 39: τὸ ἔσωθεν budv—‘‘the inward parts.” 


399 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἡ φωνὴ τοιοῦτον ἠχεῖ," εὐθὺς ἐν τοῖς ὄμμασιν 
ἐξέχει, ὡς τῶν ἐραστῶν ἐν τῷ βλέμματι πάντα 
εὐθὺς γνωρίξει ὁ ἐρώμενος. τοιοῦτον ὅλως δεῖ 
τὸν ἁπλοῦν καὶ ἀγαθὸν εἶναι, οἷον γράσωνα, (Va ὁ 
παραστὰς ἅμα τῷ προσελθεῖν, θέλει οὐ θέλει, 
αἴσθηται. ἐπιτήδευσις δὲ ἁπλότητος σκάλμη 
ἐστίν. οὐδέν ἐστιν αἴσχιον λυκοφιλίας" πάντων 
μάλιστα τοῦτο φεῦγε. ὁ ἀγαθὸς καὶ ἁπλοῦς 
καὶ εὐμενὴς ἐν τοῖς ὄμμασιν ἔχουσι ταῦτα καὶ οὐ 
λανθάνει. 

coe Κάλλιστα διαξῆν, δύναμις αὕτη ἐν τῇ 
ψυχῆ, ἐὰν πρὸς τὰ ἀδιάφορά τις ἀδιωφορῇ. 
ἀδιαφορήσει δέ, ἐὰν ἕκαστον αὐτῶν θεωρῇ διηρη- 
μένως καὶ ὁλικῶς καὶ μεμνημένος, OTL οὐδὲν 
αὐτῶν ὑπόληψιν περὶ αὐτοῦ ἡμῖν ἐμποιεῖ οὐδὲ 
ἔρχεται ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς! ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν ἀτρεμεῖ, ἡμεῖς δέ 
ἐσμεν οἱ τὰς περὶ αὐτῶν κρίσεις γεννῶντες καὶ 
οἷον γράφοντες ἐν ἑαυτοῖς, ἐξὸν μὲν μὴ γράφειν, 
ἐξὸν δέ, κἄν που λάθῃ, εὐθὺς ἐξαλεῖψαι" ὅτι 
ὀλίγου χρόνου ἔσται ἡ τοιαύτη “προσοχὴ καὶ 
λοιπὸν πεπαύσεται ὁ βίος. τί μέντοι δύσκολον 
ἄλλως" ἔχειν ταῦτα; εἰ μὲν γὰρ κατὰ φύσιν 
ἐστί, χαῖρε αὐτοῖς καὶ ῥάδια ἔστω cour εἰ δὲ 
mapa φύσιν, ξήτει, τί ἐστὶ σοὶ κατὰ τὴν σὴν 
φύσιν, καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦτο σπεῦδε, κἂν ἄδοξον 7: 
παντὶ γὰρ συγγνώμη, τὸ ἴδιον ἀγαθὸν ζητ- 
οὔὗντι. 


1 ἔχει PA: ἠχεῖ Reiske.  σκαμβὴ (uw bent stick that 
can never be made straight) Salm. ᾿ καλῶς ἢ, 


oe 





1 The word is Thracian for a native sword (Pollux x. 38), 
as we might say a ἀπά. Here any concealed weapon to 
stab the unsuspecting. 


304 


head. Thereisa ring ur the voree that betrays 1 
at once, it flashes out at onee from the eyes, Just as 
the loved one can read at a glance every seerct in 
his lover's looks ‘Phe simple and good inan should 
in fact be hke a man who has a strong smell about 
him, so that, as suon as ever he comes near, his 
neighbour is, will-he nill-he, aware of it. AA caleulated 
snuplicity is a stiletto! There is nothing more 
hateful than the fmendship of the wolf for the 
lamb ἔφοδον that above all things ‘The yood 
man, the kindly, the genuine, betrays these character- 
istics in lis eyes and there is no hiding 1t.- 

16. Vested in the seul is the power of living ever 
the noblest of lives, let a man but be indifferent to- 
wards things indifferent. And he will be indifferent, 
if he examine every one of these things both in rts 
component parts ἡ and as a whole, and bear im inind 
that none of them is the cause in us of any opimion 
about itself, nor obtrudes itself on us. Lhey remaus 
quiescent! and it 1 we who father these judgments 
about them and as it were insembe them on our 
minds, though it hes with us not to insenbe them 
and, if they chance to steal in undetected, to erase 
them at once  Bearin mind too that we shall have 
but a little while to attend to such things and 
presently life will be at an end. But why complam 
of the perversity of things? If they are as Nature 
wills, dehght in them and let them be no hardship 
to thee. If they contravene Nature, seek then 
what is in accord with thy nature and specd Lowards 
that, even though it be unpopular ' Por it is par- 
donable for every man to seek his own good. 


* ¢p. Eoclesiasticus xix. 29. “A man shall be known by his 


look.” 
3 ain. 17: xii. IS ae ae SA 47 ov 3; vi. 2. 


395 


bo 


y= 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ιζ. Πόθεν ἐλήλυθεν ἕκαστον, καὶ ἐκ τίνων 
ἕκαστον ὑποκειμένων, καὶ εἰς τί μετωβάλλει, 
καὶ οἷον ἔσται μεταβαλόν, καὶ ὡς οὐδὲν κακὸν 
πείσεται. 

νη. Kail πρῶτον, τίς ἡ πρὸς ἀνθρώπους μοι 
σχέσις" καὶ ὅτι ἀλλήλων ἕνεκεν γεγόναμεν" καὶ 
καθ᾽ ἕτερον λόγον προστησόμενος αὐτῶν γέγονα, 
ὡς κριὸς ποίμνης ἢ ταῦρος ἀγέλης. ἄνωθεν δὲ 
ἔπιθι ἀπὸ τοῦ, εἰ μὴ ἄτομοι, φύσις ἡ τὰ ὅλα 
διοικοῦσα' εἰ τοῦτο, τὰ χείρονα τῶν κρειττόνων 
ἕνεκεν, ταῦτα δὲ ἀλλήλων. 

Δεύτερον δέ, ὁποῖοί τινές εἰσι» ἐπὶ τῆς 
τραπέξ ης, ἐν τῷ κλιναρίῳ, τἄλλα: μάλιστα δέ, οἷας 
ἀνάγκας ογμάτων κειμένας ἐ ἔχουσιν, καὶ αὐτὰ δὲ 
ταῦτα μεθ᾽ οἵου τύφου ποιοῦσιν. 

Τρίτον, ὅτι, εἰ μὲν ὀρθῶς ταῦτα ποιοῦσιν, οὐ 
δεῖ δυσχεραίνειν" εἰ δ᾽ οὐκ ὀρθῶς, δηλονότι 
ἄκοντες καὶ “ἀγνοοῦντες. πᾶσα γὰρ ψυχὴ ὁ ἄκουσα 
στέρεται, ὥσπερ τοῦ ἀληθοῦς, οὕτως καὶ τοῦ 
κατ᾽ ἀξίαν ἑκάστῳ προσφέρεσθαι. ἄχθονται 
γοῦν ἀκούοντες ἄδικοι καὶ ἀγνώμονες καὶ πλεον- 
éxtas καὶ καθάπαξ ἁμαρτητικοὶ περὶ τοὺς 
πλησίον. 

Τέταρτον, ὅτι καὶ αὐτὸς πολλὰ ἁμαρτάνεις, καὶ 
ἄλλος τοιοῦτος εἶ" καὶ εἰ τινων δὲ ἁμαρτημάτων 
ἀπέχῃ, ἀλλὰ τήν ye ἕξιν ποιητικὴν δ ἔχεις, εἰ 
καὶ διὰ δειλίαν ἢ δοξοκοπίαν ἢ τοιοῦτο TL κακὸν 
ἀπέχῃ τῶν ὁμοίων ἁμαρτημάτων. 

1 καὶ PA=K(emadra)a’ Rend., but cp. vil. ὅ]. 53 ἐποιστικὴν A. 





λ χὰ 1], Sars Τ Oe ΠΣ 2 fy 3 viii. 56, 59. 
+ Dio Chrys. Orat. 11. de Reyno, 97 R, ὃ δὲ ταῦρος σαφῶς 
πρὸς βασιλέως εἰκόνα πεποίηται. Hpict 1. 2, § 30. 


206 


BOOK NI 


17. Think whence exch thing bay come, of what 
ἰδ ας built ap,! mtoe what it changes, what it will be 
when changed, and that rt cannot take any harm. 

18, Firstly: Consider thy relation? to mankind 
and that we came into the world for the sake of one 
another ὃ; and taking another pomt of view, that I 
have come into it to be set over men, as a ram over 
a flock or a bull over a herd! Start at the 
beginning from this premiss: [f not atoms,” then an 
all-eontrolling Nature If the latter, then the 
lower are for the sake of the higher and the higher 
for one another.” 

Secondly - What sort of men they are at board 
and in bed and elsewhere.” Above all how they 
are the seif-made slaves of their principles, and how 
they pride themselves on the very acts in question. 

Thirdly: ‘That if they are acting mghtly in this, 
there is no call for us to be angry. Lf uot rightly, 
it is obviously ayainst ther will and = threugh 
ignorance.S — For it is against his will that every Sal 
is deprived, as of truth, so too of the power of dealing 
with each man as is his due. At any rate, suc ἢ 
men resent being called unjust, unfeeling, avaricious, 
and in a word doers of wrong to their neighbour 5 

Fourthly: Vhat thou too doest inany a wrong 
thing thyself and art much as others are,? and if 
thou dost refrain from certun wrong-doings, yet 
hast thou a disposition inelmnable thereto !2 even 
supposing that through vowardice or a regard for 
thy good name or some such base consideration thou 
dost not actually commit them. 


PIV: ἢ, 83; νῆι 17; aK, 39, NH 


σι, 1 ν. 16. Twin. 14: x. 19 
: 11 1; LY. ὃ; νη]. 92, 69. 
‘wi, 10; x. 30 6. Τ7 cd onel 


20) 


5 


6 


Land 


4 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ἰ]έμπτον, ὅτι οὐδε, εἰ ἁμαρτάνουσι, κατεϊλ- 
Ἀ \ / 
ηῴφας' πολλὰ yap καὶ κατ᾽ οἰκονομίαν γίνεται. 
Ν Φ \ an / a tf 
καὶ ὅλως πολλὰ δεῖ πρότερον μαθεῖν, ἵνα τις 
ὔ “Ἢ 
περὶ ἀλλοτρίας πράξεως καταληπτικῶς τι 
a / 
ἀποφήνηται. 
han ῳ ce / γ A ΕῚ \ 
Kerov, ὃτι, ὅταν λίαν ἀγανακτῆς ἢ Kal 
al a) id ? 
δυσπαθῆς, ἀκαριαῖος ὁ ἀνθρώπειος βίος καὶ μετ᾽ 
/ 
ὀλίγον πάντες ἐξετάθημεν. 
“ [5 5 ee 3 ς τ 2. δ 5 ΝΥ 
ὕβδομον, ὅτι οὐχ αἱ πράξεις αὐτῶν ἐνοχλοῦσ..- 
ἐν ἡμῖν: ἐκεῖναι yap εἶσιν ἐν τοῖς ἐκείνων 
φ nw δ] Ἀ e ὁ ‘4 . , i‘ 
NYEMOVLKOLS’ ἀλλὰ AL ἡμέτεραι ὑπολήψεις. pov 
an \ / > " \ ¢ a 
γοῦν καὶ θέλησον ἀφεῖναι τὴν ws περὶ δεινοῦ 
? nN b) n a 
κρίσιν, καὶ ὠπῆλθεν ἡ ὀργή. πῶς οὖν ἀρεῖς; 
¢ \ Ν 
λογισάμενος, ὅτι οὐκ αἰσχρόν' ἐὰν γὰρ μὴ 
᾽ \ 
μόνον 1) τὸ αἰσχρὸν κακόν, ἀνώγκη καὶ σὲ 
Ν Ἀ A 
πολλὰ ἁμαρτάνειν Kal λῃστὴν καὶ παντοῖον 
γενέσθαι. 
‘Ordon, ὅσῳ χαλεπώτερα ἐπιφέρουσιν αἱ 
ὀργαὶ καὶ λῦπαι αἱ ἐπὶ τοῖς τοιούτοις, ἤπερ 
9 4) τς 3 he sf θ \ / a 
αὐτά ἐστιν, ἐφ᾽ ols ὀργιζόμεθα καὶ λυπούμεθα. 
δ ’ὔ f 
“Evvarop, ὅτι τὸ εὐμενὲς ἀνίκητον, ἐὰν γνήσιον 
53 , 
7 καὶ μὴ σεσηρὸς μηδὲ ὑπόκρισις. τί yep σοι 
ποιήσει ὁ ὑβριστικώτατος, ἐὰν διατέλῇς εὐμενὴς 
αὐτῷ Kal, εἰ οὕτως ἔτυχε, πράως παραινῇς καὶ 
\ 
μεταδιδάσκῃς εὐσχολῶν παρ᾽ αὐτὸν ἐκεῖνον τὸν 
καιρόν, ὅτε κακὰ ποιεῖν σε ἐπιχειρεῖ" “Μή, 
\ A \ 
TéKVOV' πρὸς ἄλλο πεφύκαμεν. ἐγὼ μὲν οὐ μὴ 





1 Or, ““ἐὐὐ an eye to circumstances,” “irith some further 
end in view,” knowledge of which would justify the action or 
shew its necessity. 


2 AK 885. 3 yn 16; viii. 40; 1% 135 xi. 11, 16. 
4 wii. 16. 5x 10 


308 


BOOK Xl 


Fifthly. That thou hast not even proved that 
they are doing wrong, for many things are done even 
“by way of policy.’ γι Speaking gencrally a man must 
know many things before he can pronounce an 
adequate opinion on the acts of another. 

Sivthly: When thou art above measure angry or 
even out of patience, bethink thee that inan’s life τ 
momentary, and in a httle while we shall all have 
been laid out. - 

Seventhly: Vhat in reality it is not the acts men 
do that vex us—for they belong to the domain of 
heir valing Reason—but the opimons we form of 
those acts*® Eradieate these, be ready lo discard 
thy conclusion that the act m question is a calamity, 
and thine anger is at an ὁ. How then eradicate 
these opinions? By realizing that no act of another 
debases us. For unless that alone which debases 
oan evil, thou too must perforce do many ἃ 
wrong thing and beeome a brigand? or any sort of 
man, 

Kighthly: Betbk thee how much more grievous 
are the consequences of our anger and vexation at 
such actions than are the acts themselves which 
arouse that anger and vexation. 

Nanth/y : Phat kindness is irresistible," be it but 
sincere and no mock snile or aimask assuined. For 
what can the most unconscionable of men do to 
thee, if thou persist in being kindly to him, and 
when a chance is given exhort him mildly and, at 
the very time when he is trymg to do τὴ πὰ harm, 
quietly teach him a better way‘ thus. Nay, my child, 
we have been made for other things. { shall be am 


δ Sen de Beno vn. 51 rauneif analas peartinaa bonatis, 
“: 


BAS GOR ee ὦν IE ak, ἄγχι [ὃ 
309 


10 


1] 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


βλαβῶ, σὺ δὲ βλάπτῃ, τέκνον." Kal δεικνύναι 
εὐαφῶς καὶ ὁλικῶς, OTL τοῦτο οὕτως ἔνχει, 
OTL οὐδὲ μέλισσαι αὐτὸ ποιοῦσιν οὐδ᾽’ ὅσα 
συναγελαστικὰ πέφυκεν. δεῖ δὲ μήτε εἰρωνικῶς 
αὐτὸ ποιεῖν μήτε ὀνειδιστικῶς, ἀλλὰ φιλο- 
στόργως καὶ ,ἀδήκτως τῇ ψυχῇ" καὶ μὴ ὡς ἐν 
σχολῇ, μηδὲ ἵ iva ἄλλος παραστὰς θαυμάσῃ" ἀλλ᾽ 
ἤτοι! πρὸς μόνον, καὶ ἐὰν ἄλλοι τινὲς περιεστήκ- 
ωσιν. 

Τούτων τῶν ἐννέα κεφαλαίων μέμνησο, ὡς 
παρὰ τῶν Μουσῶν δῶρα εἰληφώς: καὶ ἄρξαι 
ποτὲ ἄνθρωπος εἶναι, ἕως ζῇς. φυλακτέον δὲ 
ἐπίσης τῷ ὀργίζεσθαι αὐτοῖς τὸ κολακεύειν 
αὐτούς: ἀμφότερα γὰρ ἀκοινώνητα καὶ πρὸς 
βλάβην. φέρει. πρόχειρον δὲ ἐν ταῖς ὀργαῖς, 
ὅτι οὐχὶ τὸ θυμοῦσθαι ἀνδρικόν, ἀλλὰ τὸ πρᾷον 
καὶ ἥμερον, ὥσπερ ἀνθρωπικώτερον, οὕτως καὶ 
ἀρρενικώτερον, καὶ ἰσχύος καὶ νεύρων καὶ ἀν- 
δρείας τούτῳ μέτεστιν, οὐχὶ τῷ ἀγανακτοῦντι καὶ 
δυσαρεστοῦντι. ὅσῳ yap ἀπαθείᾳ τοῦτο οἰκειό- 
τερον, τοσούτῳ καὶ δυνάμει. ὥσπερ τε 1) λύπη 
ἀσθενοῦς, οὕτως καὶ ἡ ὀργή. ἀμφότεροι γὰρ 
τέτρωνται καὶ ἐνδεδώκασιν. 

Ee δὲ βούλει, καὶ δέκατον παρὰ τοῦ Movonye- 
TOU δῶρον λάβε, ὅτι τὸ μὴ ἀξιοῦν ἁμαρτάνειν 
τοὺς φαύλους μανικόν' ἀδυνάτου γὰρ ἐφίεται. 
τὸ δὲ συγχωρεῖν ἄλλοις μὲν εἷναι τοιούτους, 
ἀξιοῦν δέ, μὴ εἰς σὲ ἁμαρτάνειν, ἄγνωμον καὶ 
τυραννικόν. 

1 ἡ τὴι Fourmer. 


lux 4, 2 χη 13, 
3 en, Tno 71. 3, § 4. 4 iv. 31, 


BOOK XI 


no nese harmed, but thou art harming thyself,’ my 
child.  Shew him delicately and without any 
personal reference that this 1s so, and that even 
honey-bees do not act thus nor any creatures of 
gregarious instincts But theu must do this not τῇ 
irony? or by way of rebuke, but with kindly 
affection and without any bitterness at heart, not as 
from a master’s chair, nor yet to impress the 
bystanders, but as if he were mdceed alone even 
though others are present 

Bethink thee then of these nine heads, taking 
them as a gift fromthe Muses, and begin at last to 
be aman while life is thine. But beware of flattering ὃ 
men no less than being angry with them.! For 
both these are non-social and conducive of harm, [n 
temptations to anger a precept ready to thy hand 1s 
this: to be wroth is not manly, Dut a mild and 
gentle disposition, as it is more human, so0.1b IS more 
masculine. Sueh a aman, and not he who vives way 
to anger and discontent, 1s endowed with “strength 
and sinews and manly courage. For the nearer sich 
a mind attains to a passive calm,”? the nearer is the 
man to strength. <As grief is a weakness, so also is 
anger. In both it is a case of a wound and a 
surrender. 

But take if thou wilt as a tenth gift from Apollo, 
the Leader of the Muses, this, that lo expect the 
bad not to do wrong is worthy of a madman; for 
that is to wish for impossibilities. 6 But to acquicsce 
in their wronging others, while expecting them to 
refrain fron wronging thee, is unfeeling and despotic.” 


* The Stoic dmradera. Da 17; ψἱὦ, 7| eae. 4. 
han 273 ὅρη, εἦρ fia Blo gyrepar might alo be trans- 


lated acasedess, 
ari 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ιθ΄. “Γέσσαρας μάλιστα τροπὰς τοῦ ἡγεμονικοῦ 
παραφυλακτέον διηνεκῶς καί, ἐπειδὰν φωράσ- 
nS; ἀπαλειπτέον ἐπιλέγοντα ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου οὕτως" 
«Τοῦτο τὸ φώντασμα οὐκ ἀναγκαῖον: τοῦτο 
λυτικὸν κοινωνίας' τοῦτο οὐκ ἀπὸ σαυτοῦ μέλλεις 
λέγειν." τὸ γὰρ μὴ ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ λέγειν ἐν τοῖς 
ἀτοπωτάτοις νόμιζε. τέταρτον δέ ἐστι, καθ᾽ ὃ 
σεαυτῷ ὀνειδιεῖς, ὅτε τοῦτο ἡττωμένου ἐστὶ καὶ 
ὑποκατακλινομένου τοῦ ἐν σοὶ θειοτέρου μέρους τῇ 
ἀτιμοτέρᾳ καὶ θνητῇ μοίρᾳ τῇ τοῦ σώματος, καὶ 
ταῖς τούτου παχείαις ἰδέαις." 

κ΄. Vo μὲν πνευμάτιόν σου καὶ τὸ πυρῶδες 
πᾶν, ὅσον ἐγκέκραται, καίτοι φύσει ἀνωφερῆ 
ὄντα, ὅμως πειθόμενα τῇ τῶν ὅλων διατάξει, 
παρακρατ τεῖται ἐνταῦθα ἐπὶ τοῦ συγκρίματος. 
καὶ τὸ γεῶδες δὲ τὸ ἐν σοὶ Tay καὶ τὸ ὑγρὸν, 
καίτοι κατωφερὴ ὄντα, ὅμως ἐγήγερται καὶ 
ἕστηκε τὴν οὐχ ἑαυτῶν φυσικὴν στάσιν. οὕτως 
apa καὶ τὰ στοιχεῖα ὑπακούει τοῖς ὅλοις, 
ἐπειδὰν που κατατειχθῇ, σὺν βίᾳ μένοντα, μέχρις 
ἂν ἐκεῖθεν πάλιν τὸ ἐνδόσιμον τῆς διαλύσεως 
σημήνῃ. 

Οὐ δειιὸν οὖν “μόνον τὸ νοερὺν σοῦ μέρος 
ἀπειθὲς εἶναι καὶ ἀγανακτεῖν τῇ ἑαυτοῦ χώρᾳ; 
καίτοι οὐδέν γε βίαιον τούτῳ ἐπι τάσσεται, ἀλλὰ 
μόνα Gow κατὰ φύσιν ἐστὶν αὐτῷ' οὐ μέντοι 
ἀνέχεται, ἀλλὰ τὴν ἐναντίαν φέρεται. ἡ γὰρ ἐπὶ 
τὰ ἀδικήματα καὶ τὰ ἀκολαστήματα καὶ τὰς 
opyas καὶ τὰς λύπας καὶ τοὺς φόβους κίνησις 
οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἐστὶν ἢ ἀφισταμένου τῆς φύσεως. 


! 


ἡδοναῖς VL. ' Porhaps πνευματικόν ep. iv. 4, see Index in 


312 


BOOK NI 


19. Against four perversions of the ruling Reason 
thou shouldest above all keep unceasing watch, and, 
once detected, wholly abjure them,' saying in each 
case to thyself: This thought ws not necessary 3 this is 
destructive of human fellowship; this could be no 
genuine ullerance from the heart —Aud uot to speak 
from the heart, what is if bat a contradiction in 
Lerms ?—The fourth case is that of self-reproach,® 
for that 1s an admission that the divine part of thee 
has been worsted by and acknowledges its inferiority 
to the body, the baser and mortal partner, and to its 
gross notions. 

30. Thy soul and all the fery part that is blended 
with thee, though by Nature ascensive, yel ΠῚ 
subnussion to the system of the Universe are held 
fast here i thy compound personality. And the 
entire earthy part too in thee and the humid, although 
naturally descensive, are vet upraised and take ap 
a station not their natural one. ‘Thus indeed we 
find the elements also in subjection to the Whole 
and, when set anywhere. remaining there under con- 
straint until the signal sound for their release again 
therefrom 

Isat ποὺ then a paradox that the mbtelligent part 
alone of thee should be rebclhous and quarrel! with 
itsslationr Yet is no constramet laid upon it but only 
so much as is m aecordance with its nature. How- 
beit it does not comply and takes a contrary course. 
For every motion towards acts of mjustiec and heen- 
Liousness, Lowards anger and gricf and fear, but be- 
tokens one who cults himself adritt from Nature. Aye 

ESae LG: Ξ τὰς, ἐν τ 

ἦν δι sin Te ὁ,» Bronto, ad Cues ἀν 13, where 
Mareus reprodehes limes th when TO vears old for backward- 
ness in philasap ly 

ar 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


καὶ ὅταν δέ τινι τῶν συμβαινόντων δυσχεραίνῃ 
\ 
TO ἡγεμονικὸν, καταλείπει καὶ τότε τὴν ἑαυτοῦ 
χώραν. πρὸς ὁσιότητα 1 γὰρ καὶ θεοσέβειαν 
, 
κατεσκεύασται οὐχ ἧττον ἢ πρὸς δικαιοσύνην. 
καὶ γὰρ ταῦτα ἐν εἴδει ἐστὶ τῆς εὐκοινωνησίας, 
a) \ 7 “᾿ 
μᾶχνλον δὲ πρεσβύτερα τῶν δικαιοπραγημά- 
των. 
“ \ κυ \ 4 9 ΄ > > \ Ἂ ? 
κα. Ou μὴ εἷς καὶ o αὐτὸς ἐστιν ἀεὶ τοῦ βίου 
f © Ὁ Ν e \ ed Ca 
σκοπὸς, οὗτος εἷς καὶ ὁ αὐτὸς OL ὅλου τοῦ βίου 
μὰ ΄ 
εἶναι οὐ δύναται. οὐκ ἀρκεῖ «δὲ; τὸ εἰρημένον, 
ἐὰν μὴ κἀκεῖνο προσθῇς, ὁποῖον εἶναι δεῖ τοῦτον 
er 
τὸν σκοπόν. ὥσπερ γὰρ οὐχ ἡ πάντων TOV 
e ia) a ? ca 
ὁπωσοῦν «τοῖς» πλείοσι δοκούντων ἀγαθῶν 
° ᾽ὔ e / > ,7 ᾽ Ἄν, “ “ 7 
υπόληψρις ομοιῶ ἐστίν, ἀλλ y τῶν τοιῶνδέ τίνων, 
τουτέστι τῶν κοινῶν, οὕτω καὶ τὸν σκοπὸν δεῖ 
τὸν κοινωνικὸν καὶ πολιτικὸν ὑποστήσασθαι. ὁ 
γὼρ εἰς τοῦτον πάσας τὰς ἰδίας ὁρμὰς ἀπευθύνων 
Ν Ν , 
πάσας τὰς πράξεις ὁμοίας ἀποδώσει καὶ κατὰ 
e Ν 
τοῦτο ἀεὶ ὁ αὐτὸς ἔσται. 
7ὔ Ν “ \ 2 Ν \ Ν ,ὔ oO 
κβ΄. Tov μῦν τὸν ὀρεινὸν καὶ τὸν κατοικίδιον " 
/ 
καὶ τὴν πτοίαν τούτου καὶ διασόβησιν. 
Ss \ “A a ’ 
κγ΄. Σωκράτης καὶ τὰ τῶν πολλῶν δόγματα 
‘ “ 3.»ϑ. 5 4 OL ὃ ὔ 
Λαμίας ἐκάλει, παιδίων δείματα. 
ἤ n \ / al 
KO. Λακεδαιμόνιοι τοῖς μὲν ξένοις ἐν ταῖς 
/ ¢ Ν “a “ \ “ > Ὁ > \ 
θεωρίαις ὑπὸ TH σκιᾶ Ta βάθρα ἐτίθεσαν, αὐτοὶ 
/ 3 7 
δέ, οὗ ἔτυχον, ἐκαθέζοντο. 


1 ἰσότητα PA. em Cas. 
: 


* ὀρεινὸν and κατοικίδιον require tiansposing to give τούτον 
its correct meaning. 





xi. 9. 
2 xu. ἢ, ὁσιότης τ δικαιοσύνη moos θεούς, sce Stob. Hel. 
ne 104. 3 Pit ep. κι. 10. 


BOOK XI 


and when the ruling Reason in a man is vexed at any- 

thing that befalls, at that very moment it deserts its 
station. For it was not made for justice alone, but 
also for piety ὁ and the service of God. And in 
fact the latter are included under the idea of a 
true fellowship, and indeed are prior to the practice 
of justice.? 

21. He who has not ever in view one and the same 
goal of lite cannot be throughout his life one and 
the same? Nor does that which is stated suffice, there 
needs to be added what that goal should 6. For 
just as opinion as to all the things that in one way 
or another are held by the mass of men to be 
good is not uniform, but only as to certam things, 
such, that is, as affect the common weal. so must 
we set before ourselves as our goal the common 
and civic weal. For he who directsall his dividual 
impulses towards this goal will render his actions 
homogeneous and thereby be ever consistent with 
himself.° 

22 Do not forget the story of the town mouse 
and the country mouse, and the excitement and 
trepidation of the latter.® 

23. Socrates used to nickname the opinions of the 
multitude Ghouls,” bogies to terrify children. 

24. The Spartans at their spectacles assigned to 
strangers seats in the shade, but themselves took 
their chance of seats anyw here. 


ton. Dio 71. 34, 8 5. ὅμοιυς διὰ πάντων» ἐγένετο καὶ ἐν ovbér 
ἠλλοιώθη: Aristides ad Ney. 8.115. (Jebb), says he was ὁ 


αὐτὸς διὰ τέλους ὅκα δὶ 6 Aesop, Fah 297; Hor. Sat. 
ui. 6 ff 7 Lamrae, ov “vampires,” “fabulous monsters 


said to feed on human flesh, οι. «1 7.540; Apul. wef, 1.57, 
ep Epict. πὶ 1, 8 14: ταῦτα Σωκράτης μορμολυκεῖα ἐκάλει: 
Philostr V7. .lpol/.iv 25, whence Keats took his Lea murs 


315 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


, ms δί ς 
κε. Τῷ Iep ἱκκαᾷ ὁ Σωκράτης περὶ τοῦ μὴ 
ἔρχεσθαι παρ᾽ αὐτόν' “Ta,” ἔφη, “μὴ τῷ 
κακίστῳ ὀλέθρῳ ἀπόλωμαι," τουτέστι, μὴ εὖ 
παθὼν οὐ δυνηθῶ ἀντευποιῆσαι. 
κε΄. “Ep τοῖς τῶν ᾿Εφεσίων γράμμασι παράγ- 
γελμα ἔκειτο συνεχῶς ὑπομιμνήσκεσθαι τῶν 
παλαιῶν τινος τῶν ἀρετῇ χρησαμένων. 
κζ΄. Οἱ Πυθαγόρειοι ἕωθεν εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν 
ἴω 3 
ἀφορᾶν, iy ὑπομεμνησκώμεθα τῶν ἀεὶ κατὰ 
τῷ αὐτὰ καὶ ὡσαύτως τὸ ἑαυτῶν ἔργον δια- 
νυόντων καὶ τῆς τάξεως καὶ τῆς καθαρότητος 
ςἍ 1 
καὶ τῆς γυμνότητος. οὐδὲν γὰρ προκάλυμμα 
f 
ἄστρου. » 
/ e € / \ ἤ ζ 
κη. Οἷος ὁ Σωκράτης, τὸ κῴδιον ὑπεζωσ- 
“ δ᾽ δ — τ al \ τ f 4) 
μένος, ὅτε ἡ Ξανθίππ λαβοῦσα τὸ ἱμώτιον “ἔξω 
προῆλθεν" καὶ ἃ εἶπεν ὁ Σωκράτης τοῖς ἑταίροις 
αἰδεσθεῖσι καὶ ἀναχωρήσασιν, ὅτε αὐτὸν εἶδον 
οὕτως ἐσταλμένον. 
t 4 ω / \ > ’ 2 
κθ΄. Εν τῷ γράφειν καὶ ἀναγινώσκειν οὐ 
πρότερον ἄρξεις. πρὶν ἀρχθῇς. τοῦτο πολλῷ 
μᾶλλον ἐν τῷ βίῳ. 
f / ἐμ 
λ΄. “Δοῦλος πέφυκας, οὐ μέτεστί σοι Χόγου." 


λα΄. ὰ ᾿ὑμὸν δ᾽ ἐγέλασσε φίλον κῆρ. 
Nowe * Μέμψονται δ᾽ ἀρετὴν χαλεποῖς βάξοντες 
ἔπεσσιιν..᾽ 


f own a “ i : 
λγ. Σῦκον χειμῶνος ζητεῖν μαινομένου 


1 °?Enicovpelay (ial. (τον Sen Hp χ The only ᾿Εφεσίων 
γμάμματο, known were magical formulae 





vee 


According to Diog. Laert. Socr 9; Sen de Ben v. 6,82; 
- Rhet. Δ 23, this was Archelaus, son of Perdiceas. 


2 cp. Fronto, ad A pprinum, Nab p 25] 
* Sen. Hp. 11, attributes the sae to the Hpicureans : 


316 


BOOK ΧΙ 


25. Sucrates refused the invitation of Perdiccas } 
to his court, That f come not. said he, lu a dishonuured 
grave, Meanmy, that | be not tre: ited with generosity 
und have no power to return it.” 

26. In the writings of the Ephesians? was laid 
down the advice to have constantly in remembrance 
some one of the ancients who lived virtuously. 

27. Look, said the Pythaugoreans, at the sky in the 

wornmeg, that we may have m remembrance those 
hosts of heaventhat ever follow the saine course and 
accomplish their work in the same w: ay. and their 
orderly system, and their purity. and them nakedness : 
for there 15 no veil before a star. 
« 28. Think of Socrates with the sheepskin wrapped 
round him, when Xanthippe had gone off with 
his coat, and what he said to his frends when they 
drew back in their embarrassment at seeing him thus 
accoutred. 

29. In reading and writmg thou must learn first 
to follow instruction before thou canst give it 
Much more is this true of life. 

30, Las nol for thee, a slave, to reason+ why 

Blo... . and within me my heart laughed.® 

32, Partue they mill upbraid and speak harsh words in 
her hearing. b 

33. Only a madman null look for jigs im winter. 


aligias vir bonus nobis eligendus est ac semper ante oculos 
hahendus ul sic tanquam lo spectunte reramus εἰ omni 
illo ridente facramus floc Bincurus pruecepit See. however, 
Plut. Symp. vi. ὅ ad fin 

Ὁ It is not clear whether λόγος here means speech or reason 
or both. The citation, of which the author is not known. 
has no obvious appheation; still less has the following 
quotation from Homer 5 Hom. Od. 1x. £13 

" Hes. Op. 185, where the reading 18 ἄρα τοῖς for aperqy. 


317 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τοιοῦτος ὁ τὸ παιδίον ζητῶν, ὅτε οὐκ ἔτι 
δίδοται." 
“a ta 3 
NO. ““Καταφιλοῦντα τὸ παιδίον δεῖν, ἔλεγεν 
ὁ ᾿ξιπίκτητος, “ἔνδον ἐπιφθέγγεσθαι' Δὕριον 
ΧΑ] n \ 
ἴσως ἀποθανῇ. δύσφημα ταῦτω “Οὐδὲν δύσφη- 
ὙὙ ὦ ἐδ Ὁ ν an » 
pov, ἔφη, “᾿ ἀλλα φυσικοῦ τινος ἔργου σημαντ- 
/ 3 
ov. ἢ καὶ τὸ τοὺς στάχυας θερισθῆναι 
δύσφημον." 
re. "Ομφαξ, σταφυλή, σταφίς, πάντα μετα- 
,ὔ 2 > \ \ oo 3 ) 2 Ν fa \ oo 
ora, οὐκ εἰς TO μὴ OV, ἀλλ, εἰς TO νῦν μὴ ὃν. 
f ce \ / > / ” \ 
AS. AnotTns προαιρέσεως οὐ γίνεται: τὸ 
a or 7] 
τοῦ 'ὡπικτήτου. ᾿ 
7 \ 3% ‘ \ 
λζ΄. “Ὑέχνην be,” ἔφη," “ wept τὸ συγκατατί- 
¢e a \ n \ e \ \ 
θεσθαι εὑρεῖν, καὶ ἐν τῷ περὶ τὰς ὁρμὰς τόπῳ TO 
Ν 7 t/ 3 ς 7 
προσεκτικὸν φυλάσσειν, ἵνα μεθ᾽ ὑπεξαιρέσεως, 
Γ, / 7 2 7 \ / 
iva κοινωνικαΐ, ἵνα κατ᾽ ἀξίαν: καὶ ὀρέξεως μὲν 
> / 7 \ \ 
παντάπασιν ἀπέχεσθαι, ἐκκλίσει δὲ πρὸς μηδὲν 
“ 9 a “ 20 
τῶν οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν χρῆσθαι. 
“ 4 ic ? 
rn’. “Od περὶ τοῦ τυχόντος ody, ἔφη, “ ἐστὶν 
¢ 94 7 2 \ Χ ca} / x 49> 
ὁ ἀγών, ἀλλὰ περὶ τοῦ μαίνεσθαι ἢ μή. 
ς Ὁ nn 
λθ΄. ὋὉ Σωκράτης ἔλεγε: “Tt θέλετε; λογικῶν 
\ Μ BY 2 f [ω nid 
ψυχὰς ἔχειν ἢ ἀλόγων ; Δογικῶν. Tivor 
ΓᾺ Ὰ SX ¢ ‘a [4 ὧν 
λογικῶν; ὑγεῶν ἢ φαύλων; Tyiav. Te οὖν 
? a ef v rye > / θ \ 
ov ζητεῖτε; “Ore ἔχομεν. ‘Tt ovy μάχεσθςε καὶ 
52 
διαφέρεσθε; 


1 ἀλλὰ omit P: perhaps ὄνομα from Hpict. m1. 24, § 91. 
) 


* ἔφη δὲ A: δεὶ Kron. 





} Hpict. ri. 24, 8 87 quoted, not verbatin, 
2 tbid. iii, 24, § 88. 4. Kpict. ni 24, § 91. 
δ φρο, Wii. 22, § 105. 


BOOK Ni 


Nu betler is he who lovks for a child whea he may no 
longer have une ἢ 

91. 40 oman while fondly hissing hes child, says 
Epictetus, should whisper in his heart? + Lo-morron 
peradventure thou wilf die’ U-omened words these ' 
Nay; said he, xotheng as ell-omened that signifies a natural 
process. Ov uf as ifl-umened also to talk of ears of corn 
bemg reaped. 

25 The grape unmpe, mellow. dried—in every 
stage we have a change, not into non-existence, but 
into the net now existent ° 

36. Hear Epictetus: ro one can rob us of our free 

choice # 
37 Ie mast, savs heb hed upon the true science of 
assent and in the sphere of our impulses pay good heed 
that they be subject fo proper reservations,” thal they 
have m wen our neighbours welfare; thal they are 
proportionate to worth, And we must abstuen wholly 
jrom inordinate desire and skem avoidance a none of the 
things that are not iw ow contol. 

38 Lléiews no casual matler, then, said he, that is ai 
stake, but whether we are to be sane or no.* 

39. Socrates was wont to say:8 JVhat would 
ye have? Lhe souls of reasoning or unreasoning 
creatures? Of reasoning creatures. Of what hind of 
reasoning creatures ? Sound or υἱοιο £ Sound. Why 
then not make a shift to get them? Because we have 


. 5S 
them already. iVhy then fight and wrangle ? 


5 we. Hpictetus. cp. ni 22, § 105, and Manuel, un 2 

Siv Ls vi 203 νι. ὅθ; ce. not uncondrteonally, but subject 
to modification by circumstances 

τ Epict. 1. 22, §§ 17-21; Hor. Sar. 3 18, 
> Only found here. 


BIBAION IB 


t , ᾿ 2 OA der .ὰ ® ὃ ? 
a. \lavra ἐκεῖνα, ἐφ᾽ ἃ διὰ περιόδου εὔχῃ 
ω 2 ’ \ 4 ἮΝ 
ἐλθεῖν, ἤδη ἔχειν δύνασαι, ἐὰν μὴ σαυτῷ φθονῇς. 
ἴων ὙΝ ~ \ Ν 
τοῦτο δέ ἐστιν, ἐὰν πᾶν τὸ παρελθὸν καταλίπῃς 
YAN ἢ ) , a , \ \ \ 
καὶ TO μέλλον ἐπιτρέψῃς τῇ Tpovolg καὶ τὸ παρὸν 
μόνον ἀπευθύνῃς πρὸς ὁσιότητα καὶ δικαιοσύνην. 
ς / χὰ a“ \ f 
ὁσιότητα μέν, ἵνα φιλῇς TO ἀπονεμόμενον" σοὶ γὰρ 
\ 7 \ Ν ΄ ,ὔ 
αὐτὸ ἡ φύσις ἔφερε καὶ σὲ τούτῳ. δικαιοσύνην 
’ Cs 3 / Ν Ν ra 7 
δέ, ἵνα ἐλευθέρως καὶ χωρὶς περιπλοκῆς λέγης 
a ΄ \ ΄ 
τε τἀληθῆ καὶ πράσσῃς τὰ κατὰ νόμον καὶ 
3 > Sal \ 3 ,ὔ / / / 
κατ᾿ ἀξίαν. μὴ ἐμποδίζῃ δέ oe μήτε κακία 
ἀλλοτρία μήτε ὑπόληψις μήτε φωνὴ μηδὲ μὴν 
, ,Ὰ / 
αἴσθησις τοῦ περιτεθραμμένου σοι σαρκιδίου' 
ὄψεται γὰρ τὸ πάσχον. 
3 ἣν & ¢ ὃ f \ ’ © 4 ,ὔ 
Kav οὖν, ὁοτεδήποτε πρὸς ἐξόδῳ γένῃ, πάντα 
\ f 
τὰ ἄλλα καταλιπὼν μόνον TO ἡγεμονικὸν σου 
nw , \ Ψ, ‘ 
καὶ τὸ ἐν σοὶ θεῖον τιμήσῃς, Kal μὴ TO παύσεσθαί 
La tal al \ , 
ποτε «τοῦ; Env φοβηθῆς, ἀλλὰ TO γε μηδέποτε 
” \ ΄ fo 2 ” ” 
ἄρξασθαι κατὰ φύσιν ζῆν, gon ἄνθρωπος ἄξιος 
a 7) ; / 3 a) 
TOU γεννήσαντος κόσμου καὶ παύσῃ Eévos ὧν τῆς 
7) 
πατρίδος καὶ θαυμάξων ὡς ἀπροσδόκητα τὰ καθ᾽ 





.--.ο.ὃ.ὃὕςος.-... 


1x 33; Hor, μα. 11 ad fin 


BOOK XII 


1. Ati those things, which thou prayest to attain 
by a roundabout way, thou canst have at once if thou 
deny them not to thyself!; that is to say, if thou 
leave all the Past to riself and entrust the Future 
to Providence,’ and but direct the Present in the way 
of piety and justice: piety, that thou mayest love thy 
lot, for Nature brought it to thee and thee to it; 
justice, that thou mayest speak the truth freely and 
without finesse, and have an eye to law and the due 
worth of things? in all that thou doest; and let 
nothing stand in thy way, not the wickedness of 
others, nor thine own opinion, nor what men say, nor 
even the sensations of the flesh that has grown 
around thee +; for the part affected will see to that. 

If then, when the time of thy departure is near, 
abandoning all else thou prize thy ruling Reason 
alone and that which im thee is divine,® and dread 
the thought, not that thou must one day cease to 
live, but that thou shouldst never yet have begun 
to live according to Nature, then shalt thou be a 
man worthy of the Universe that begat thee, and 
no longer an alien® in thy fatherland, no longer 
shalt thou marvel at what happens every day as if it 

νη, 8; St. Matt. vi 34. ὁ xi. 37 (Hpictetus). 
4 vi 68. 5 xii. 26. § iv. 29; xn. 18. 


B21 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ἡμέραν γινόμενα καὶ κρεμάμενος ἐκ τοῦδε καὶ 
τοῦδε. 
ἢ ¢ \ , ν ὁ \ \ n 
β΄. Ὃ Geos πάντα τὰ ἡγεμονικὰ γυμνὰ τῶν 
ς nm b) ’ὔ Ν cal \ θ / 1 
ὑλικῶν ὠγγείων καὶ ᾧλοιῶν καὶ καθαρμώτων 
la “ “ ‘al f 
ὁρᾷ. μόνῳ yap τῷ ἑαυτοῦ νοερῷ μόνων ἅπτεται 
ΦΔᾺ a “ / 
τῶν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ εἰς ταῦτα ἐρρυηκότων καὶ ἀπωχετ- 
Ν \ ω A 
ευμένων. ἐὰν δὲ καὶ σὺ τοῦτο ἐθίσῃς ποιεῖν, 
Ν a 
τὸν πολὺν περισπασμὸν σεαυτοῦ περιαιρήσεις. 
are) > 
ὁ yap μὴ τὰ περικείμενα κρεάδια ὁρῶν ὃ. οτι ες 
fal 4g 
ἐσθῆτα καὶ οἰκίαν καὶ δόξαν καὶ τὴν τοιαύτηι 
Ν , 2 
περιβολὴν καὶ σκηνὴν θεώμενος ἀσχολήσεται; 
γ΄. Τρία ἐστίν, ἐξ ὧν συνέστηκας" σωμάτιον, 
la) / f Ἂ 
πνευμάτιον, VOUS. τούτων τἄλλα μέχρε τοῦ 
a mn \ \ 
ἐπιμελεῖσθαι δεῖν σά ἐστι' τὸ δὲ τρίτον μόνον 
7 ἤ Ν 9 a 3 Ν la) 
κυρίως σόν. καὶ ἐὰν" Ywpions amo σεαυτοῦ, 
al ia / ‘4 
τουτέστιν ἀπὸ τῆς σῆς διανοίας, ὅσα ἄλλοι 
la) 5 / 3 x4 \ f 3 
ποιοῦσιν i) λέγουσιν ἢ ὅσα αὐτὸς ἐποίησας ἢ 
εἶπας, καὶ ὅσα ὡς μέλλοντα ταράσσει σε, καὶ ὅσα 
fe) / / δ “ 
τοῦ περικειμένου TOL σωματίου ἢ τοῦ συμφύτου 
“ ῇ δ 
πνευματίον ἀπροαίρετα πρόσεστιν, καὶ ὅσα ἡ 
yd / 7 ςς 7 er n 
ἔξωθεν περιρρέουσα δίνη ἑλίσσει, ὥστε τῶν 
f f \ 
συνειμαρμένων ἐξηρμένην <Kat> καθαρὰν τὴν 
\ / > “ An lal 
νοερὰν δύναμιν ἀπόλυτον ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῆς ζῆν ποιοῦσ- 
\ \ 
av τὰ δίκαια καὶ θέλουσαν τὰ συμβαίνοντα 
\ f 2 a ἮΝ f “ a 
καὶ λέγουσαν τἀληθῆ---ἐὰν χωρίσῃς, φημί, τοῦ 
fa) / 
ἡγεμονικοῦ τούτου τὰ προσηρτημένα ἐκ προσ- 
7 \ nm f \ / 3 
παθείας καὶ τοῦ χρόνου Ta ἐπέκεινα ἢ 


hould prefer καλυμμάτων 


ITs 
2 διὸ ἐὰν Gat.: καὶ ἐὰν Stich.: ὃ ἐὰν PA. 


322 


BOOK ΧΗ 


were unforeseen, and be dependent on this or 
that. 

God sees the Ruling Parts of all men strpped 
of material vessels and husks and sloughs. For 
only with the Intellectual Part of Himself is He 
in touch with those emanations only which have 
welled forth and been drawn oif from Himself mto 
them But if thou also wilt accustom thyself to 
do this, thou wilt free thyself from the most of thy 
distracting care. For he that hath no eye for the 
flesh that envelopes hin will not, I trow, waste his 
time with taking thought for rannent and lodging 
and popularity and such accessories and trppery.! 

Thou art formed of three things in combination 
—body, vital breath, intelligence.* Of these the first 
two are indeed thine, in so far as thou must have them 
in thy keeping, but the third alone is in any true 
sense thine.’ Wherefore, it thou cut off from thyself, 
that is from thy mind, all that others do or say 
and ail that Unyself hast done or sa tid, and all that 
harasses thee in the future, or whatever thou art 
involved in independently of thy will by the body 
which envelopes thee and the breath that is twinned 
with it, and whatever the cireumambient rotation 
outside of thee sweeps along, so that thine 
intellectual faculty, delivered from the contingencies 
of destiny, may live pure and undetached by itself, 
doing what is just, desiring what befalls it, speaking 
the truth—if, I say, thou strip from this ruling 
Reason all that cleaves to it from the bodily in- 
fluences and the things that lie beyond in time and 


1 Lit stage-scenery; cp Sen. ad Mare 10. 
* 11.2; in. 16. Here πνευμάτιον = ψυχὴ (soul) in its lower 
sense, see Index IIT. 3x 38. 


323 
νι 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τὰ παρῳχηκότα ποιήσῃς τε σεαυτόν, οἷος ὁ 
᾿Εμπεδόκλειος 


“Σφαῖρος κυκλοτερής, wovin! περιηγέι γαίων," 


μόνον τε ζῆν ἐκμελετήσῃς, ὃ ζῇς, τουτέστι τὸ 
παρόν, δυνήσῃ τό γε μέχρι, τοῦ ἀποθανεῖν ὑπο- 
λειπόμενον ἀταρώκτως καὶ εὐμενῶς " καὶ ihéws τῷ 
σαυτοῦ δαίμονι διαβιῶναι. 

δ. Πολλάκις ἐθαύμασα, πῶς ἑαυτὸν μὲν 
ἕκαστος μᾶλλον πάντων φιλεῖ, τὴν δέ ἑαυτοῦ 
περὶ αὑτοῦ ὑπόληψεν ἐν ἐλάττονι λόγῳ τίθεται ἢ 
τὴν τῶν ἄλλων. ἐὰν γοῦν τινα θεὸς ἐπιστὰς ἢ 
διδάσκαλος ἔμφρων κελεύσῃ, μηδὲν καθ' ἑαυτὸν 
ἐνθυμεῖσθαι καὶ διανοεῖσθαι, ὃ μὴ ἅμα καὶ 
γεγωνίσκων ἐξοίσει, οὐδὲ πρὸς μίαν ἡμέραν 
τοῦτο ὑπομενεῖ. οὕτω τοὺς πέλας μᾶλλον 
αἰδούμεθα, τί ποτε περὶ ἡμῶν φρονήσουσιν, ἢ 
ἑαυτούς. 

ε΄, Πῶς ποτε πάντα καλῶς καὶ φιλανθρώπως 
διατάξαντες οἱ θεοί, τοῦτο μόνον παρεῖδον, τὸ 
ἐνίους τῶν ἀνθρώπων, καὶ πάνυ χρηστοὺς καὶ 
πλεῖστα πρὸς τὸ θεῖον ὥσπερ συμβόλαια θεμέν- 
ους, καὶ ἐπὶ πλεῖστον δι ἔργων ὁσίων καὶ 
ἱερουργιῶν συνήθεις τῷ θείῳ γενομένους, ἐπειδὰν 
ἅπαξ ἀποθάνωσι, μηκέτι αὖθις γίνεσθαι, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς 
τὸ παντελὲς ἀπεσβηκέναι; τοῦτο δὲ εἴπτερ “ἄρα 
καὶ οὕτως ἔχει, εὖ ἴσθι, ὅτι, εἰ ὡς ἑτέρως ἔχειν 
ἔδει, ἐποίησαν ἄν. εὐ γὰρ δίκαιον ἣν, ἣν ἂν καὶ 
δυνατόν, καὶ εἰ κατὰ φύσιν, ἤνεγκεν ἂν αὐτὸ ἡ 

1 μονῇ A: κονῇ P: κώνῃ Cor.: μονίῃ Peyron.: περιήθει ῬΑ: 


περιηγέι Cor. 
5 εὐμενῶς Reiske: εὐγενῶς PA. 


324 


BOOK NII 


the things that are past, and if thou fashion thyself 
like the Empedoclean 


Sphere with its circle true m its poise well-rounded 
rejoicing, 

and school thyself to live that life only winch is 

thine, namely the present, so shalt thou be able 

to pass through the remnant of thy davs calmly, 

kindly, and at peace with thine own ‘ genius.’ ? 

4. Often have I inarvelled how each one of us 
loves himself above all inen, vet sets less store by his 
own opinion of himself than by that of everyone else. 
At any rate, ifa God or some wise texcher should come 
to a man and charge him to admit no thought or 
design into his mind that he could not utter aloud 
as soon as conceived,? he could not endure this 
ordinance for a single day. So it is clear that we 
pay more deference to the opinion our neighbours 
will have of us than to our own 

5D. How can the Gods, after disposmg all things 
well and with good will towards men, ever have over- 
Jooked this one thing, that some of mankind, and 
they especially good men, who have had as 1t were the 
closest commerce with the Divine, and by devout 
conduct and acts of worship have been in the most 
intimate fellowship with it, should when once dead 
have no second existence but be wholly extinguished δὲ 
But if indeed this be haply so, doubt not that 
they would have ordained it otherwise, had it needed 
to be otherwise. For had it been just, it would 
also have been feasible, and had it been in conformity 
with Nature, Nature would have brought it about. 

1 νη], 413 xi. 12. cp. Hor. Sat. ui. 7, 95+ in seipso totus 


teres (ἶφι rotundus. 441.13; 11 5 ete. Fan 4, 
+ For Marcus’ views on Imimoitality, see Introd. 


325 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


\ lal \ 
φύσις. ἐκ δὴ τοῦ μὴ οὕτως ἔχειν, εἴπερ οὐχ 
7 XN \ a e 
οὕτως ἔχει, πιστούσθω σοι, TO μὴ δεῆσαι οὕτω 
¢ ἴω \ / 4, taal 
γίνεσθαι. ὁρᾷς yap καὶ αὐτὸς, ὅτι τοῦτο 
a A \ \ t ’ x w) 
παραξζητῶν δικαιολογῇ πρὸς τὸν θεόν' οὐκ ἂν ὃ 
δ, f »“" ~ 
οὕτω διελεγόμεθα τοῖς θεοῖς, εἰ μὴ ἄριστοι Kal 
,ὔ / Δ lal 
δικαιότατοί εἰσιν. εἰ δὲ τοῦτο, οὐκ ἄν TL περιεῖδον 
\ ΄, a n 
ἀδίκως καὶ ἀλόγως ἡμελημένον τῶν ἐν TH 
7 
διακοσμήσει. 
/ Vv \ e/ 3 4 A \ e 
cs. ᾿Εθιζε καὶ ὅσα ἀπογινώσκεις. καὶ yap ἢ 
\ ¢ 2 7 Ν \ vy τ \ \ ¥ A 
χεὶρ ἡ ἀριστερώ, πρὸς τὰ ἄλλα διὰ τὸ ἀνέθιστον 
\ > “ fa 3 
ἀργὸς οὖσα, τοῦ χαλινοῦ ἐρρωμενέστερον ἢ ἡ 
\ ἴω Cal \ 4 
δεξιὰ κρατεῖ. τοῦτο γὰρ εἴθισται. 
ζ΄. Ὅ ποῖον δεῖ Kart: «ληφθῆναι ἱ ὑπὸ τοῦ θανώτου 
καὶ σώματι καὶ ψυχῇ: τὴν βραχύτητα τοῦ βίου, 
ἴω 4 f al \ 
τὴν ἀχάνειαν τοῦ ὑπίσω καὶ πρόσῳ αἰῶνος, τὴν 
ἀσθένειαν πάσης ὕλης. 
η΄. Τυμνὼὰὼ τῶν φλοιῶν θεάσασθαι τὰ αἰτιωδη': 
Fond f 
Tas ἀναφορὰς τῶν πράξεων' τί πόνος" τί ἡδονή: 
"82 ae i ae: nd , v 
τί θάνωτος" τί δόξα" Tis ὁ ἑαυτῷ ἀσχολίας αἴτιος" 
A 3 \ ¢ ’ yA ᾿] ΄ cf f 
πῶς οὐδεὶς ὑπ᾽ ἄλλου ἐμποδίζεται" ὅτε πάντα 
ς / 
ὑπόληψις. 
, “ δ᾽ > ὃ a) fa) A ἣν / 
θ΄. “Ὅμοιον δ᾽ eivar det ἐν τῇ τῶν δογμάτων 
χρήσει παγκρατιαστῇ, οὐχὶ μονομάχφῳ' ὁ μὲν yap 
TO ξίφος, ὦ χρῆται, ἀποτίθεται καὶ ἀναιρεῖται" 0 
δὲ τὴν χεῖρα ἀεὶ ἔχει καὶ οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ συσ- 
, ἡ Nee 
τρέψαι αὑτὴν O€L. 





τῳ. Job (xin. 3), 1 desire to reason with ΟἸοεῖ, where ἃ 
similar point is argued. 


2 iv. 26. 3 iv, 50; v. 233; χα 89, 


226 


BOOK XII 


Theretore from its not being so, if indeed it 1s not so, 
be assured that it ought not to have been so. For 
even thyself canst see that in this presumptuous 
enquiry of thine thou art reasoning with God.? But 
we should not thus be arguing wilh the Gods were 
they not infinitely good and just. But in that case 
they could not have overlooked anything σης 
wrongly and irrationally neglected in ther thorough 
Ordering of the Universe. 

6. Practise that also wherein thou hast no expect- 
ation of success For even the left hand, which 
for every other function is metiicient by reason of a 
want of practice, has vet a firmer erip of the bridle 
than the mght For it has had practice in this. 

7. Reflect on the condition of body and _ soul 
befitting a man when overtaken by death, on the 
shortness of hfe,? on the vawning gulf? of the past 
and of the time to come, on the impotence of all 
matter. 

&. Look at the principles of causation stmpped of 
their husks; at the objective of actions; at what 
pain is, what pleasure, what death, what fume. See 
who is to blame for a man’s mner unrest; how no 
one can be thwarted by another*; that nothing 1s 
but what thinking makes it. 

9. In our use of principles of conduct we should 
imitate the pancratiast not the gladiator." For the 
latter lays aside the blade which he uses, and takes 
it up again, but the other always has his hand and 
needs only to clench it. 


tv B34: vil. 16, 

ὅφ Be vay 40; x1 22, Shak. Ham. n 2. 256. 

6 Or, the proce-fiyhler not the duellist. Sone take dvaip- 
εἴται to mean ‘78 s/ain,’ 


as) 
i) 
ὩΣ 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


} TI at 5»- τ Ν / al ὃ ‘a 
be ola! αὐτὰ τὰ πράγματα, ὁρᾶν διαιροῦντα 
εἰς ὕλην, αἴτιον, ἀναφοράν. 
ια΄. Ἡλίκην " ἐξουσίαν ἔχει ἄνθρωπος μὴ 
om f $ a , ant 
ποιεῖν ἄλλο ἢ ὅπερ μέλλει ὁ θεὸς ἐπαινεῖν, Kal 
δέχεσθαι πᾶν, ὃ ἂν νέμῃ αὐτῷ ὁ θεὸς. 
7] Ν Coan A oA / tad / 
ιβ΄. To ἑξῆς τῇ φύσει μήτε θεοῖς μεμπτέον' 
\ 
οὐδὲν yap ἑκόντες ἢ ἄκοντες ἁμαρτάνουσιν" μήτε 
\ 
ἀνθρώποις’ οὐδὲν γὰρ οὐχὶ ἄκοντες. ὥστε 
οὐδενὶ μεμπτέον. 
7 a n~ / [4 nw 
uy’. Πῶς γελοῖος καὶ ξένος ὁ θαυμάζων ὁτιοῦν 
n 3 la) / “ 
τῶν ἐν τῷ βίῳ γινομένων. 
» 5 / ¢ / \ > ,, 
tO. Ἤτοι ἀνάγκη εἱμαρμένη «καὶ ἀπαρά- 
/ Υ̓ 7 ᾿ 
βατος τάξις, ἢ πρόνοια χάσιμος, ἢ φυρμὸς 
’ \ δ 
εἰκαιότητος ἀπροστάτητος. εἰ μὲν οὖν ἀπαρά- 
, 7 
Batos ἀνάγκη, τί ἀντιτείνεις; εἰ δὲ πρόνοια 
9 7 Ν δ 7 bY \ ΄ 
ἐπιδεχομένη τὸ ἱλάσκεσθαι ἄξιον σαυτὸν ποίη- 
nN 3 a) / “ 3 \ Ν 
gov τῆς ἐκ τοῦ θείου βοηθείας. εἰ δὲ φυρμὸς 
“ “ ce “ 
ἀνηγεμόνευτος, ἀσμένιζε, ὅτι ἐν τοιούτῳ [τῷ] 
κλύδωνι αὐτὸς ἔχεις ἐν σαυτῷ τινα νοῦν ἤγεμον- 
/ 3 / ¢ , 
LKOV. κἂν παραφέρῃ σε ὁ κλύδων, παραφερέτω 
τὸ σαρκίδιον, τὸ πνευμάτιον, τἄλλα' τὸν γὰρ 
γοῦν οὐ παροίσει. (ιε.) Ἢ τὸ μὲν τοῦ λύχνου 
φῶς, μέχρι σβεσθῇ, φαίνει καὶ τὴν αὐγὴν οὐκ 
3 ͵ e Qi 2 Gs Say \ , 
ἀποβάλλει: ἡ δὲ ἐν σοὶ ἀλήθεια καὶ δικαιοσύνη 
/ 
Kal σωφροσύνη προαποσβήσεται; 
3 A 7 
i. Ἔπὶ τοῦ φαντασίαν παρασχόντος, ὅτι 
» cmp ἢ \ ἮΝ > Ν .- ΈΕΣΥ 
ἥμαρτεν" “Τί δαὶ οἶδα, εἰ τοῦτο ἁμάρτημα; εἰ δὲ 
καὶ ἥμαρτεν, ὅτι κατέκρινεν αὐτὸς ἑαυτὸν καὶ 
! Gat. for τοιαῦτα : δεῖ αὐτά Reiske. 


2 σὸ ὑλικὴν (cp, § 18) A αὖ end of 8 10, 


328 


BOOK Nill 


10. See things as they really are, analyzing them 
into Matter, Cause, Objective.! 

11. What a capacity Man has to do only what God 
shall approve and to welcome all that God assigns 
him ! 

12. Find no fault with Gods for what is the course 
of Nature, for they do no wrong? voluntarily or 
involuntarily; nor with men, for ther do none save 
involuntarily.’ Find fault then with none. 

13. How ludicrous is he and out of place who 
marvels at anything that happens in life.® 

141. There must be either a predestined Necessity 
and inviolable plan, or a gracious Providence, or 
a chaos without design or director. If then there 
be an inevitable Necessity, why kick against the 
pricks? lf a Providence that is ready to be gracicus, 
render thyself worthy of divine succour. But if a 
chaos without guide, congratulate thyself that amid 
such a surging sea thou hast in thyself‘a guiding 
Reason. And if the surge sweep thee away, let it 
sweep away the poor Flesh and Breath with their 
appurtenances: for the Intelligence it shail never 
sweep away. (15.) What! shall the truth that is in 
thee and the justice and the temperance be ex- 
tinguished ere thou art, whereas the light of a lamp 
shines forth and keeps its radiance until the flame 
be quenched? 

16. Another has given thee cause to think that 
he has done wrong: But how do I know thal it as a 
wrong? And even if he be guilty, suppose that his 


1 νὴ ll; xi. 18, 29. 2.1.1] ὁ vil, 22 ete. ie 
4 Kpict. Afan. 5. ie 1, ὅ σι. 90" ιχ, 58. 


329 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


οὕτως ὅμοιον τοῦτο τῷ καταδρύπτειν τὴν ἑαυτοῦ 
ὄψιν. 

Ὅτι ὁ ὁ μὴ θέλων τὸν φαῦλον ἁμαρτάνειν ὅμοιος 
τῷ μὴ θέλοντι τὴν συκῆν ὀπὸν ἐν τοῖς σύκοις 
φέρειν καὶ τὰ βρέφη. κλαυθμυρίξεσθαι καὶ τὸν 
ἵππον χρεμετίξειν καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα ἀναγκαῖα. τί 
γὰρ πάθῃ τὴν ἕξιν ἐ ἔχων τοιαύτην; εἰ οὖν γοργὸς 
εἰ, ταύτην εράπευσον. 

ες: Ἐν "μὴ καθήκει, μὴ “πράξῃς: εἰ μὴ ἀληθές 
ἐστι, μὴ εἴπτῃς. ἡ γὰρ ὁρμή σου ἔστω «ἐπὶ σοί». 

un’. Ἐς τὸ πᾶν ἀεὶ ὁρᾶν, τί ἐστιν αὐτὸ ἐκεῖνο 
τὸ τὴν φαντασίαν σοι ποιοῦν, καὶ ἀναπτύσσειν, 
διαιροῦντα εἰς τὸ αἴτιον, εἰς τὸ ὑλικόν, εἰς τὴν 
ἀναφοράν, εἰς τὸν χρόνον, ἐντὸς οὗ πεπαῦσθαι αὐτὸ 
δεήσει. 

ιθ΄. Αἰσθου ποτέ, ὅτι κρεῖττόν τι καὶ δαιμονιώ- 
τερον ἔχεις ἐν σαυτῷ τῶν τὰ πάθη ποιούντων 
καὶ καθάπαξ τῶν νευροσπαστούντων σε. τί μου 
νῦν ἐστιν ἡ διάνοια; μὴ φόβος; μὴ ὑποψία; μὴ 
ἐπιθυμία; μὴ ἄλλο τι τοιοῦτον; 

κ΄. Uparov, τὸ μὴ εἰκῇ μηδὲ ἄνευ ἀναφορᾶς. 
δεύτερον, τὸ μὴ ἐπ᾽ ἄλλο τι ἢ ἐπὶ τὸ κοινωνικὸν 
τέλος τὴν ἀναγωγὴν ποιεῖσθαι. 

κα΄. “Ort per οὐ πολὺ οὐδεὶς οὐδαμοῦ ἔσῃ, 
οὐδὲ τούτων τι, ἃ νῦν βλέπεις, οὐδὲ τούτων τις 
τῶν νῦν βιούντων. ἅπαντα yap μεταβάλλειν 
καὶ τρέπεσθαι καὶ φθείρεσθαι πέφυκεν, ἵνα ἕτερα 
ἐφεξῆς γίνηται. 

κβ΄. Ὅτι πάντα ὑπόληψις" καὶ αὕτη ἐπὶ σοί. 


Liv § 
} 


2a. 10, Or, application. 
33° 


BOOK Nii 


own heart has condemned him, and so he is as one 
who wounds his own face ἢ 

Note that he who would not have the wicked do 
wrong is as one who would not have the fig-tree 
secrete acrid juice! in its fruit, would net have 
babies ery, or the horse neigh, or have any other 
things be that must be. Why, what else can be 
expected from such a disposition? Ir then it chafes 
thee, cure the disposition. 

17. If not meet, do it nut: if not true, say it not. 
For let thine impulse be in thy own power. 

18 Ever look to the whole of a thing, what 
exactly that is which produces the impression on 
thec, and unfold if, analyzing it intu its causes. 1ts 
matter, ils objective? and into its life-span within 
which it must needs cease to be. 

19. Become conscious at last that thon hast im 
thyself something better and more god-lke than 
that which causes “the bodily passions and tums thee 
into a mere marionette.2 What is my mind now 
occupied with*+? Fear? Suspicion?  Concupis- 
cence®? Some other hke thing? 

20. Firstly, eschew action that is ainless and has 
no objective. Secondly, take as the only goal of 
conduct what is to the comimon interest." 

21. Bethink thee that thou wilt very soon be no 
one aud nowhere, and so with all that thou now 
seest and all who are now living. For by Nature's 
law all things must change, be transformed, and 
perish, that other things may in their turn come into 
being.’ 

29 Remember that all 15. but as thy opinion 


34] 2 ete. eae ᾿ 5. 10: 1x. 40. 
θν 16: x1 3), Myx, 28, 32 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ἂ S e f \ [4 7 \ e 
ἄρον οὖν, ὅτε θέλεις, τὴν ὑπόληψιν, καὶ ὥσπερ 
Ἁ 7) \ 
κάμψαντι τὴν ἄκραν, γαλήνη, σταθερὰ πάντα 
\ / 
καὶ κόλητος ἀκύμων. 
f 7 \ ξ wn > \ \ 
ky. Μία καὶ ἡτισοῦν ἐνέργεια κατὰ καιρὸν 
7 +O\ Ν, 
παυσαμένη οὐδὲν κακὸν πάσχει, καθ᾽ ὃ πέπαυται" 
᾿ Ν ¢ \ A , 
οὐδὲ ὁ πράξας τὴν πρᾶξιν ταύτην κατ᾽ αὐτὸ 
“ 3 e / 
τοῦτο, καθ᾽ ὃ πέπαυται, κακόν τι πέπονθεν. 
¢ ’ δ \ fal tal 4 
ὁμοίως οὗν τὸ ἐκ πασῶν τῶν πράξεων σύστημα, 
ὕ 3 \ ς ᾽ \ A 
ὅπερ ἐστὶν ὁ βίος, ἐὰν ἐν καιρῷ παύσηται, οὐδὲν 
4 7 3 a Q 
κακὸν πάσχει KAT αὐτὸ τοῦτο, καθ᾽ ὃ πέπαυται" 
2OX C ΄ ral nr 
οὐδὲ ὁ καταπαύσας ἐν καιρῷ τὸν εἱρμὸν τοῦτον 
“ / \ \ 
κακῶς διετέθη. τὸν δὲ καιρὸν καὶ τὸν ὅρον 
δίδ ς ? \ \ \ ¢ POL ef ) 
ἰδωσὶν ἢ φύσις, ποτε μὲν καὶ ἡ LOLA, ὅταν ἐν 
, 7 Ν “ “ > Nn ~ 
γήρᾳ, πάντως δὲ ἡ τῶν ὅλων, ἧς τῶν μερῶν 
, ν 3 “Ἅ r 
μεταβαλλόντων νεαρὸς ἀεὶ καὶ ἀκμαῖος ὁ σύμπας 
͵ ΄ ν Ν ΣΝ a“ \ “ 
κόσμος διωμένει. καλὸν δὲ ἀεὶ πᾶν καὶ ὡραῖον 
Ν 7, a ὦ id , “ f 
TO συμφέρον TO ὅλῳ. ἡ οὖν κατάπαυσις τοῦ βίου 
Ν Ψ 3 Ν 3 “ \ 
ἑκάστῳ οὐ κακὸν μέν, OTL οὐδὲ αἰσχρὸν, εἴπερ καὶ 
Ν 
ἀπροαίρετον καὶ οὐκ ἀκοινώνητον' ἀγαθὸν δέ, 
nA ¢ \ / \ , 
εἴπερ τῷ ὅλῳ καίριον καὶ συμφέρον καὶ συμφερο- 
δ \ , ζ ; 
μενον. οὕτω yap Kal θεοφόρητος ὁ φερόμενος 
ΝᾺ \ ~ 
κατὰ ταὐτὰ θεῷ καὶ ἐπὶ ταὐτὰ TH γνώμῃ 
f 
φερόμενος. 
/ fe ed ἴω “a , }} ab] Ν 
co. Τρία ταῦτα δεῖ πρόχειρα ἔχειν' ἐπὶ 
\ ® Ἂ > f ἘΝ » oy Ὰ ¢ A 
μὲν WY ποιεῖς, EL μῆτε εἰκῇ μὴτε ἄλλως ἢ ὡς ἂν 
¢ / 3 \ 3 is 3 Ν \ a ¥ 
ἡ δίκη αὐτὴ ἐνήργησεν" ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν ἔξωθεν συμ- 
ty / x 
βαινόντων, ὅτι ἤτοι κατ᾽ ἐπιτυχίαν ἢ κατὰ 





1 αὶ, 15 ete. 2 ep. Lucian, Scyth. ad jin. Ὁ 1x5 21, 
414, 25, δ, J); iv. 3; vin 1. 6 43,3: ili, 4. 


33? 


BOOK Nil 


of it,) and that is in thy power. Efface thy upinicu 
then, as thou mayest do at will, and lo, a great 
calm! Like a mariner that has turned the head- 
land thou tindest all at set-fair and a halcyun sea.“ 

23. Any single form of activity, be 1t what 
it may, ceasing in its own due season, suffers no 
ill because it hath ceased. nor dues the agent 
suffer in that it hath ceased to act.’ Similarly 
then if life, that sum total of all our acts, cease in its 
own good time, 1t suffers no ill from this very fact. 
nor is he in an ill plight who has brought this chain 
of acts to an end in its own due time. The due 
season and the terminus are fixed by Nature, at times 
even by our individual nature, as when in old age, but 
in any case by the Universal Nature, the constant 
change of whose parts keeps the whole Universe 
ever youthful? and in its prime. All that is ad- 
vantageous to the Whole is ever fair and in its 
bloom. The ending of life then is not only no 
evil to the individual—-for it brings him no disgrace,’ 
if in fact it be both outside our choice and not 
inimical to the general weal—but a good, since it is 
timely for the Universe, bears its share in it and is 
borne along with it. For then is he, who is borne 
along on the same path as God, and borne in his 
judgment towards the same things, indeed a man 
god-borne.' 

24, Thou must have these three rules ready for 
use. Firstly, not to do anything, that thou doest, 
aimlessly,® or otherwise than as Justice herself would 
have acted; and to realize that all that befalls thee 
from without is due either to Chance or to Providence, 


7 Epict. u. 16, § 42: πρὸς τὸν θεὸν ἀναβλέψας εἰπεῖν, ὅμο- 
γνωμονῶ σοι. 8 iv, 2; vni.l7; ix. 28. 


333 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


πρόνοιαν" οὔτε δὲ τῇ ἐπιτυχίᾳ μεμπτέον οὔτε τῇ 
προνοίᾳ ἐγκλητέον. δεύτερον τὸ; ὁποῖον ἕκαστον 
ἀπὸ σπέρματος | μέχρι ψυχώσεως καὶ ἀπὸ 
ψυχώσεως μέχρι τοῦ τὴν Ψυχὴν ἀποδοῦναι, καὶ 
ἐξ οἵων ἡ σύγκρισις καὶ εἰς οἷα ἡ λύσις. τρίτον, 
ἄφνω μετέωρος ἐξαρθεὶς κατασκέψαιο τὰ 

ἀνθρώπεια καὶ τὴν πολυτροπίαν, ὅτι κατα- 
φρονήσεις συνιδὼν ἅμα καὶ ὅσον τὸ περιοικοῦν 
ἐναερίων καὶ ἐναιθερίων' καὶ ὅτε, ὁσάκις ἂν 
ἐξαρθῇς, ταὐτὰ ὄψει, τὸ ὁμοειδές, τὸ ὀλιγοχρόνιον. 
ἐπὶ τούτοις ὁ τῦφος. 

κε΄. Bare ἔξω τὴν ὑπόληψιν: σέσωσαι. τίς 
οὖν ὁ κωλύων ἐκβαλεῖν ; 

κ-΄. ἝὍταν δυσῴφορῇς ἐπί τινι, ἐπελάθου τοῦ, 
ὅτι πάντα κατὰ τὴν τῶν ὅλων φύσιν γίνεται, καὶ 
τοῦ, ὅτι τὸ ἁμαρτανόμενον ἀλλότριον, καὶ ἐπὶ 
τούτοις τοῦ, ὅτι πᾶν τὸ γινόμενον οὕτως ἀεὶ 
ἐγίνετο καὶ “γενήσεται καὶ νῦν πανταχοῦ γίνεται: 
τοῦ, ὅση ἡ συγγένεια, ἀνθρώπου πρὸς πᾶν τὸ 
ἀνθρώπειον γένος" οὐ γὰρ αἱματίου ἢ σπερματίου, 
ἀλλὰ νοῦ κοινωνία. ἐπελάθου δὲ καὶ τοῦ, OTL ὁ 
ἑκάστου νοῦς θεός καὶ ἐκεῖθεν ἐρρύηκε: τοῦ, ὅτι 
οὐδὲν ἴδιον οὐδενός, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ τεκνίον καὶ τὸ 

1 στερήματος PA: σπέρματος (ὑὐαῦ.: στηρίγματος Schenkl: 
possibly στερεώματος ("οὐ εἰ) ficatioi). 


1 The living soul was supposed by the Stoics to be received 
at birth, see Plut. de Plucit. Phil v.15, and Stoic. Contr 38 ; 
aud for a reputed conversation on this subject between 
Marcus and the rabbi Jehuda, see Talmud, Sunh. 91 Ὁ 
(Jeunsh Hneycl. Funk & Wagnalls, 1902). 

2 vh. 48; 1x. 30. 

? op, Lucian, Charon (throughout). What Marcus means 
by ἐναέριοι and ἐναιθέριοι (or the neuters of these) 1s not 


334 


BOOK Xfi 


nor hast thou any call to blaine Chance or to inipeach 
Providence. Secondly this: to think what each crea- 
ture is trom conception till it receives a living soa, 
and from its reception of a living soul till its giving 
back of the same,! and out of what it is built up and 
into what it is dissolved. Zhird/y, that if carried 
suddenly into mid-heaven thou shouldest iouk down 
upon human affairs’ and thew infinite diversity, 
thou wilt indeed despise them? seeing at the same 
time in one view how great is the host that peoples 
the air and the aether around thee; and that, however 
often thou wert lifted up on lngh. thou wouldst 
see the same sights, evervthmg identical in kind, 
everything fleeting. Besides, the sanity of it all: 

2D. Overboard with opinion? and thou art safe 
ashore. And who is there prevents thee from 
throwing it overboard ? 

26, In taking umbrage at anything, thou forgettest 
this, that everything happens m accordance with the 
Universal Nature ®; and this, that the wrong-doing is 
another’s"; and this furthermore that all that happens, 
always did happen,’ and will happen 90. and is at 
this moment happening everywhere. And thou 
forgettest how strong is the kinship between man 
and mankind, for it is a community not of corpuscles, 
of seed or blood, but of intelhgence.S And thou 
forgettest this too, that each man’s intelligence is 
God? and has emanated from Him; and this, that 
nothing is a man’s very own, but that his babe, his 
clear. But cp. Apul. de deo Soer., circu med., and his disqui- 
sition on δαίμονες ; and the interesting parallel 2 Kingsv1. ΕἸ, 

4 ay. 7; vu. 17, 29; vin 29; 15.73 xn 22. 

iv, 8, 10, 6 ix. 38. eae 1, Sai 1, 

9 em. Eur. Frag. 1007, 6 γοῦς yap ἡμῶν ἐστιν ἐν ἑκάστῳ 
θεός: Cic J'use, 1. 26, § 65. 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


σωμάτιον καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ ψυχάριον ἐκεῖθεν ἐλήλυθεν' 
τοῦ, ὅτε πάνθ᾽ ὑπόληψις" τοῦ, OTL τὸ παρὸν μόνον 
ἕκαστος ζῇ καὶ τοῦτο ἀποβάλλει. 

κζ΄. Συνεχῶς ἀναπολεῖν τοὺς ἐπί τινι λίαν 
ἀγανακτήσαντας, τοὺς ἐν μεγίσταις δόξαις ἢ 
συμφοραῖς ἢ “ἔχθραις ἢ οποιαισοῦν τύχαις 
ἀκμάσαντας" εἶτα ἐφιστάνειν' “Ποῦ νῦν πάντα 
ἐκεῖνα ; καπνὸς καὶ σποδὸς καὶ μῦθος ἢ οὐδὲ 
μῦθος. συμπροσπιπτέτω δὲ καὶ τὸ τοιοῦτο πᾶν, 
οἷον Φάβιος Κατουλλῖνος ἐπ᾿ ae καὶ Λούσιος 
Λοῦπος ἐν τοῖς κήποις, καὶ Στερτίνιος ἐν Bataus, 
καὶ Ῥεβέριος ἐν Καπρίαις, καὶ Οὐήλιος Ῥοῦφος," 
καὶ ὅλως ἡ πρὸς ὁτιοῦν μετ᾽ οἰήσεως διαφορά: 
καὶ ὡς εὐτελὲς πᾶν τὸ κατεντεινόμενον' καὶ 
ὅσῳ φιλοσοφώτερον τὸ ἐπὶ τῆς δοθείσης ὕλης 
ἑαυτὸν δίκαιον, σώφρονα, θεοῖς ἑπόμενον ἀφελῶς 
παρέχειν. ὁ γὰρ ὑπὸ ἀτυφίᾳ τῦφος τυφόμενος 
πάντων χαλεπώτατος. 

en Πρὸς τοὺς ἐπιξητοῦντας, “ Ποῦ γὰρ ἰδὼν 
τοὺς θεοὺς ἢ πόθεν κατειληφώς, ὃ ὅτι εἰσίν, οὕτω 
σέβεις ;" πρῶτον μὲν καὶ ὄψει ὁ ὁρατοί εἰσιν" ἔπειτα 
μέντοι οὐδὲ τὴν ψυχὴν τὴν ἐμαυτοῦ ἑώρακα, καὶ 
ὅμως τιμῶ. οὕτως οὖν καὶ τοὺς θεούς, ἐξ ὧν τῆς 
δυνάμεως, αὐτῶν ἑκάστοτε πειρῶμαι, ἐκ τούτων, 
ὅτι τε εἰσί, καταλαμβάνω καὶ αἰδοῦμαι. 


* ΔΛούσιος Λοῦπος PA. Perhaps we should read Lucius 
Lucullus, who would be a typical mstance. 
“ ἐν Οὐηλίᾳ Barberini. 





ΤῊ, ἢ, 2 xi. 8, 22 ete. 3 ii. 145 x01. 3. 
4 vi. 473 vin. 25; x 31. 
* ep. Pers. v. 132: cinis et manes et fabula fies. 


336 


BOOK ΧΠ 


body, his very soul came forth from Him!; and 
this, that everything is but opinion?; and_ this, 
that it is only the present moment that a man 
i and the present moment only that he loses. 

. Let thy mind dwell continually on those who 
ie shewn unmeasured resentment at things, who 
have been conspicuous above others for honours or 
disasters or enmities or any sort of special lot. Then 
consider, There is all that now?+ Smoke and dust 
and a legend or not a legend even. Take any 
instance of the kind—Fabius Catullinus in the 
country, Lusius Lupus in his gardens, Stertinius 
at Baiae, Tiberius in Capreae, and Velus Rutfus—in 
fact a craze for any thing whatever arrogantiy " 
indulged. How worthless is ev erything so in- 
ordinately desired! How much more worthy of a 
philosopher is it for a man without any artifice to 
shew himself in the sphere assigned to him just, 
temperate, and a follower of the Gods. For the 
conceit that is conceited of its freedom from conceit 
is the most insufferable of all‘ 

28. If any ask, Where hast thou seen the Gods or 
how hast thou satisfied thyself of their exstence that 
thou art so devout a worshipper?®> IT answer: In the 
first place, they are even visible to the eyes.? In 
the next, I have not seen my own soul either, yet I 
honour τὺ So then from the continual proofs of 
their power I am assured that Gods also exist and I 
reverence them. 

8 For οἴησις see Hpict. 1. 8, § 6. 

7 See the story of Plato and Diogenes, Diog. Laert. vi. 2. § 4. 

5 ep. Dio 71. 34 § 2. Ἢ 

9 The stars were Gods in the Stoic view. ep. above vill. 


19, and Sen. de Benes. iv. οι 
10 Theoph, Ad Avfol. i. 2 and 5. 


4: 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


9 , ‘ 
κθ΄. Σωτηρία βίον ἕκαστον δι ὅλον αὐτὸ 
7, b] e “ 7 \ > ~ \ e f ΄ Os \ 
τί ἐστιν, ὁρᾶν, Ti μὲν αὐτοῦ τὸ ὑλικόν, τί δὸ TO 
3 ΜᾺ ? a a \ ? “Ἢ 
αἰτιῶδες: ἐξ ὅλης τῆς ψυχῆς τὰ δίκαια ποιεῖν 
\ 3 ny / , \ Ὰ > f a 
καὶ τἀληθῆ λέγειν. τί λοιπὸν ἢ ὠπολαύειν τοῦ 
n , 
ζῆν συνάπτοντα ἄλλο ἐπ᾽ ἄλλῳ ἀγαθὸν, ὥστε 
ἊΝ Ν 7 2 2 ,ὕ 
μὴῆδε τὸ βραχύτατον διάστημα ἀπολείπειν; 
t \ ἴω 7 3 , 7 
λ΄. “Ky φῶς ἡλίου, Kav διείργηται τοίχοις, 
wv ᾽ , 4 ἢ 
ὄρεσιν, ἄλλοις μυρίοις. μία οὐσία κοινή, κἂν 
7 3 7 ΄ , 
διείργηται ἰδίως ποιοῖς σώμασι μυρίοις. μία 
/ Bt 7 7, “ Δ 7 
ψυχή, κἂν φύσεσι διείργηται μυρίαις καὶ ἰδίαις 
Lal 7 Ν CY 7 
περιγραφαῖς. μία νοερὰ ψυχή, κἂν διακεκρίσθαι 
Ν \ 5 n / 
δοκῇ. τὰ μὲν οὖν ἄλλα μέρη τῶν εἰρημένων, 
ῷ , \ 
οἷον πνεύματα, Kal ὑποκείμενα ἀναίσθητα καὶ 
3 / 3 I> 7 2 ἴω Ν ΓᾺ 1 
AVOLKELWTA ἀλλήλοις" καίτοι KAKELWA TO νοοῦν 
, \ \ x \ \ 2 \ ca / Ν 
συνέχει «καὶ τὸ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ βρῖθον. διάνοια δὲ 
Ο,) Ν \ ¢ / / 
ἰδίως ἐπὶ τὸ ὁμόφυλον τείνεται καὶ συνίσταται 
3 / \ \ 
καὶ ov διείργεται TO κοινωνικὸν πάθος. 
? f a 
λα΄. Τί ἐπιζητεῖς; τὸ διαγίνεσθαι; " ἀλλὰ τὸ 
2 / \ 6 ῳ Ν ” \ / 
αἰσθάνεσθαι; τὸ ὁρμᾶν; τὸ αὔξεσθαι; τὸ λήγειν 
Ἂ Ν a “ “ιν , 
αὖθις; τὸ φωνῇ χρῆσθαι; τὸ διανοεῖσθαι; τί 
/ 7 ” ~ 3 \ Φ 
τούτων πόθου σοι ἄξιον δοκεῖ; εἰ δὲ ἕκαστα 
“ ΓᾺ 
εὐκαταφρόνητα, πρόσιθε ἐπὶ τελευταῖον τὸ 
ef κι f \ A fol > \ / 
ἕπεσθαι τῷ λόγῳ καὶ τῷ θεῷ. ἀλλὰ μάχεται 
\ la) n \ ἮΝ 
τὸ τιμᾶν ταῦτα, τὸ ἄχθεσθαι, εἰ διὰ τοῦ τεθνηκέναι 
7 an 
TTEPNTETAL TLS αὐτῶν. 


1 +h évody Rend. : τὸ νοοῦν Gat.. τὸν νοῦν PA 
- διαπνεῖσθαι Leopold 


---------............ 


1 xn. 10, 18 ete Ξν Gs 1x. 99. 
ἜΜ}. DGS 


BOOK ΧΗ 


UY. Salvation in hie depends on our seeing every- 
thing in its entirety and and its reahty. im its Matter 
and its Cause}: on our doing what is just and 
speaking what is true with all our soul. What 
remains but to get delight of life by dovetailing 
one good aci* on to another so as not to leave the 
smallest gap between * 

30. There is one Light of the Sun, even though 
its continuity be broken by walls, mountains,’ and 
countless other things. There is one comma 
Substance, even theugh it be broken up initc 
countless bodies individually characterized There i 
one Soul, though it be broken up ainong countless 
natures and by mdividual limitations, There is 
one Intelligent Soul, though it seem to be divided. 
Of the things mentioned, however, all the other 
parts, such as Breath, are the material Substratuin of 
Lhings,* devoid of sensation and the ties of mutual 
affinity—yet even they are kmt together by the 
faculty of intelligence and the gravitation which 
draws thei together. But the mind is peculiarly 
mypelled towards what is akin to it, and coalesces 
with it, and there is no break in the feeling of social 
fellowship. 

31. What dost thou ask for? Continued existence ° 
But what of sensation? Of desire? Of growth? 
Of the use of speech? The exercise of thought? 
Which of these, thinkest thou, is a thing to long 
for? But if these things are each and all of no 
account, address thyself to a final endeavour tu 
follow Reason and to follow God.® But it militates 
against this to prize such things, and to grieve if 
death comes to deprive us of them. 









4 With an alteration οὐ stops these words may mean svch 
as Breath and Matter, are devoid of sensation 
5 vii. Bl; xi. 27. 339 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


λβ΄. ἸΠόστον μέρος τοῦ ἀπείρου καὶ ἀχανοῦς 
αἰῶνος ἀπομεμέρισται ἑκάστῳ; τάχιστα γὰρ 
3 7 a 3 ? / δὲ a e/ 
ἐναφανίζεταν TH ἀιδίῳ. πόστον ὃὲ τῆς ὅλης 

3 7 4 \ a c " 3 ͵ Ν 
οὐσίας; πόστον δὲ τῆς ὅλης ψυχῆς; ἐν πόστῳ δὲ 
βωλαρίῳ τῆς ὅλης γῆς ἕρπεις; πώντα ταῦτα 
5 / A 77 7 A f ¢ \ { 
ἐνθυμούμενος μηδὲν μέγα φαντάζου ἢ τό, ὡς μὲν ἡ 

an ) 
σὴ φύσις ἄγει, ποιεῖν, πάσχειν δέ, ὡς ἡ κοινὴ 
φύσις φέρει. 

Ay. Πῶς ἑαυτῷ χρῆται τὸ ἡγεμονικόν; ἐν 
γὰρ τούτῳ τὸ πᾶν ἐστι. τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ ἢ TpoaipeTa 
ἐστιν ἢ ἀπροαίρετα, νεκρὰ καὶ καπνός. 

͵ \ ͵ / 4 f 
ro. ΤΙρὸς θανάτου καταφρόνησιν ἐγερτικώ- 
τατον, ὅτι καὶ οἱ τὴν ἡδονὴν ἀγαθὸν καὶ τὸν 
Ν 
πόνον κακὸν κρίνοντες ὅμως τούτου κατεφρόν- 
σαν. 
? Ya ἈΝ 3) , 3 Ν 4 @ Ν 
NE. Ὧι τὸ εὔκαιρον μόνον ἀγαθὸν καὶ ᾧ τὸ 


2 
ΡᾺ 


, \ ΄ 3 \ a 
πλείους κατὰ λόγον ὀρθὸν πράξεις ἀποδοῦναι TO 
’ ,ὔ Ω n 
ὀλιυγωτέρας ἐν ἴσῳ ἐστί, Kal ᾧ τὸν κόσμον θεωρῆσαι 
’ x 4 / / 
πλείονι ἢ ἐλάσσονι χρόνῳ ov διαφέρει, τούτῳ 
25 Ν F ᾽ “ 
οὐδὲ ὁ θάνατος φοβερόν. 
7 » 3 ΄, > ΝᾺ / ’ 
As. ᾽Ανθρωπε, ἐπολιτεύσω ἐν τῇ μεγάλῃ ταύτῃ 
’ / ὃ la 3 / 7 xv , 1 
πόλει" τί σοι διαφέρει, εἰ πέντε ἔτεσιν <1} ἑκατόν; 
/ 9 
TO yap κατὰ τοὺς νόμους ἴσον ἑκάστῳ. τί οὖν 
ta / 
δεινόν, εἰ τῆς πόλεως ἀποπέμπει σε οὐ τύραννος 
IDA \ 3 9 ς , ς A 
οὐδὲ δικαστὴς ἄδικος, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ φύσις ἡ εἰσαγαγοῦσα; 


«ἢ τρισὶ: Reiske: I have preferred ἑκατόν. 


1 βῇ τι ὦ 

ιν. δ0 ; v. 2H. 

2 Kpict. i. 12 αὶ 26: οὐκ οἶσθα ἡλίκον μέρος εἶ πρὸς τὰ ὄντα; 
Sint 4. TAS EL ee 91 Oe oy, 8], 


340 


BOOK Nil 


32. How tiny a fragment of the boundless abrss 
of Time has been appointed to each man!! For 
in a moment it is lost in eternity. And how tiny 
a part of the Universal Substance !- How tiny of 
the Universal Soul! And on how tiny a clod of 
the whole Earth dost thou crawl! Keeping all 
these things in mind, think nothing of moment 
save to do what thy nature leads thee to do, 
and to bear what the Universal Nature brings 
thee.® 

33. How does the ruling Reason treat itself*+ 
That is the gist of the whole matter. All else, 
be it in thy choice or not, is but as dust and 
smoke.° 

34, Most efficacious in instilling a contempt for 
death is the fact that those who count pleasure a 
good and pain an evil have nevertheless contemned 
τ. 

35. Not even death can bring terror to him who 
regards that alone as good which comes in due 
season,’ and to whom it is all one whether his acts 
in obedience to right reason are few or many, and 
a matter of indifference whether he look upon the 
world for a longer or a shorter time.* 

36. Man, thou hast been a citizen in this World- 
City,? what matters it to thee if for five years or 
a hundred? For under its laws equal treatment 
is meted out to all. What hardship then is there in 
being banished from the city, not by a tyrant or an 
unjust judge but by Nature who settled thee in it? 

6 e.g. Otho, Petronius, and Epicurus, for whose famous 
syllogism on death see Aul. Gell. ui 8; Diog. Laert. Epic. 
χχχι. § 2, and cp. Bacon’s Essay ‘‘On Death.” 

7 x, 20; xii. 28. 8 iii. 7; xii. 36. 

9 ij. 16; iii, 11; iv. 4. 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


oS 3 \ 3 7 ~ nl f Ἂ, 
οἷον εἰ κωμῳδὸν ἀπολύοι τῆς σκηνῆς ὁ παραλαβὼν 
f 3 3 \ f 7 
στρατηγός. “AX οὐκ εἶπον τὰ πέντε μέρη, ἀλλὰ 

A 3 7 [οἱ / 
τὰ τρία. καλῶς εἶπας" ἐν μέντοι τῷ βίῳ τὰ τρία 
Ψ ‘ al / 3 \ \ 7 3 a Cf 
ὅλον TO δρᾶμά ἐστιν. TO yap τέλειον ἐκεῖνος ὁρίζει 
Ἂ / al nn 

ὁ τότε μὲν τῆς συγκρίσεως, νῦν δὲ τῆς διαλύσεως 

3 7 7 7 5 
αἴτιος" σὺ δὲ ἀναίτιος ἀμφοτέρων. ἄπιθι οὗν 
th \ \ eo) / C/- 1 
LNEWS' καὶ γὰρ oO ἀπολύων ίλεως. 

1 Here follow in A the verses translated in the Introduc- 
tion. 


342 


BOOK Nii 


So might a praetor who commissions a comic actor, 
dismiss him from the stage. But 7 hare not played 
my five acts, but only ihre. Very possibly, but in 
life three acts count as a full play 1 For he. that 
is responsible for thy composition originally and thy 
dissolution now, decides when it’ is complete. 
Bat thou art responsible for neither. Depart then 
with a good grace, for he that dismisses thee is 
gracious. 
ha. δὲ χι. 1, ὥρια. fan 17. 


ων 
ἐξ» 
Cra 


THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


THER SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


INTRODUCTION 


Marcus learnt from Rusticus to “ eschew rhetoric and 
fine language”! and thanked the Gods that ‘‘he had not 
made more progress in his rhetorical studies,” ? but the 
Greek in which he clothed his Thoeyhts shews that he had 
made some progress m them, and Dio says he was 
‘‘ practised in the principles of rhetouic.” * 

Only three speeches, purporting to be by Marcus, have 
come downto us. It 1s not certain how far we can accept 
them as authentic. The first is reported by Dio Cassius, 
who was twenty at the time of its delivery, and as he 
lived at Rome, and afterwards held high ollice in the 
state, he had ample sources of information. He ex- 
pressly states that Marcus read this address to the 
soldiers on the rebellion of Cassius, and being written it 
was more likely to have been preserved verbatun. It 
cannot be denied that the speech has touches character- 
istic of Marcus, but of course these might have been 
purposely introduced by a skilful forger. On the other 
hand the style is rather rhetorical and artificial and more 
in keeping with Dio’s known proclivities Still there isa 
dignity and restraint, not altogether unworthy of the 
occasion, noticeable throughout. Unfortunately it only 
comes to us in the epitome of Xiphilinus, and we do not 
know how far he has curtailed 1t, and it certainly seems 

















1 See above, 1.7; Fronto, De Hloq. 3. 
2. See above, 1. 17, ὃ 1. + Dro, 71. 35, 81. 


346 


THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


too short for such an occasion, In any case it must nave 
been delivered in Latin. 

The last remark applies also to the dymg speech of 
Marcus as given by Herodian, ancther conterpurary 
authority, but one who was foad of cumposing suitable 
speeches fur his characters when what they had actualls 
said was not recoverable. The shoitness of this speech 
may be said to be in its favour, as the Emperor was tn 
the last stages of his ness. The openmy words are 
perhaps too plamtive and personal, but the remainder ες 
natural and appropriate. The last few words of such a 
ruler and friend must have mupressed his hearers and 
may well have been taken down at the tme. Sul it is 
stranye that there is no hint of this speech in the 
description of the last scene given by Capitolinus.' 

The third speech, from the ‘‘ Life of Avidius Cassius © 
lyy Gallicanus, 1s much less likely to be genuine. That 
particular piece of work is full of suspected material, and 
Manus Maxunus, from whom this speech 1s probably 
taken, though ἃ contemporary, 1s not a trustworthy 
authority, while the diction and absurd rhetoric of the 
missive, for it was a speech sent to the Senate and not 
delivered in 1t, are decidedly against 1ts genuimeness. 


sere a neering ent hematite 





1 Who here uses as his authority ‘The last great historian 
of Rome™; see Das Karserhaus der Antonine und der Letzie 
Historiker Roms, Otto Th Schulz, p. 128, who thinks the 
anonymous writer may have heen Lollius Urbicus. See 
Lampr. Vit, Diadum ix, 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


‘O δὲ δὴ Μάρκος παρὰ τοῦ Ovnpov! τοῦ τῆς Καππαδοκίας 
" ~ 4 
ἄρχοντος τὴν ἐπανάστασιν αὐτοῦ μαθὼν τέως μὲν συνέκρυπτεν 
~ nw ? nw 
αὐτά, ἐπεὶ δὲ of στρατιῶται τῇ τε φήμῃ ἰσχυρῶς ταράσσοντο 
\ 3 a , J 3 ᾿ ν 2). ¢ ͵ 
καὶ ἐλογοποίουν πολλά, συνεκάλεσεν αὐτοὺς καὶ ἀνέγνω τοιάδε" 


“Ove ἀγανακτήσων, ὦ συστρατιῶται, i ὀδυρούμενος παρ- 
ἐλήλυθα. χαλεπαίνειν μὲν γὰρ τί δεῖ πρὸς τὸ δαιμόνιον, ᾧ 
πάντα ἔξεστιν; ὀλοφύρεσθαι δὲ ἴσως ἀνάγκη τοὺς ἀδίκως 
δυστυχοῦντας" ὃ καὶ ἐμοὶ νῦν συμβέβηκεν. πῶς γὰρ οὐ δεινὸν 

ra ¢ “ 3 , 4 o~ > > a 
πολέμοις ἡμᾶς ἐκ πολέμων συμφέρεσθαι; πῶς δ᾽ οὐκ ἄτοπον 
“" n > 
καὶ ἐμφυλίῳ συμπλακῆναι; πῶς οὐκ ἀμφότερα καὶ δεινότητι 

\ 3 , “ \ δὲ 4 3 > 6 J > Qu 3 3 
Kal ἀτοπίᾳ νικᾷ, τὸ μηδὲν πιστὸν ἐν ἀνθρώποις eivat,? adr 
? ~ ¢ ¢ ‘ “ ‘ \ 3 Pte ΡῚ , 
ἐπιβεβουλεῦσθαι τέ με ὑπὸ τοῦ φιλτάτον καὶ ἐς ἀγῶνα ἀκούσιον 

3 , 4 
καθίστασθαι μήτε τι ἠδικηκότα μήτε πεπλημμεληκότα; ὃ. τίς 

4 \ 3 4 2 λή , δὲ λί Sd θη 3 ~ 
μὲν yap ἀρετὴ ἀσφαλής, tis δὲ φιλία ἔτι νομισθήσεται ἐμοῦ 

- θό ~ δ᾽ > 3 r r ‘ , 42.07 
ταῦτα πεπονθότος; πῶς δ᾽ οὐκ ἀπόλωλε μὲν πίστις, ἀπόλωλε 
δὲ ἐλπὶς ἀγαθή; GAN εἰ μὲν μόνος ἐγὼ ἐκινδύνευον, παρ᾽ οὐδὲν 
ἂν τὸ πρᾶγμα ἐποιησάμην" οὐ γάρ πον καὶ ἀθάνατος ἐγεννήθην" 
ἐπεὶ δὲ δημοσία τε ἀπόστασις, μᾶλλον δὲ ἐπανάστασις, γέγονε, 
καὶ ὁ πόλεμος πάντων ὁμοίως ἡμῶν ἅπτεται, ἐβουλόμην, εἰ οἷόν 
τε ἦν, προσκαλέσασθαι τὸν Κάσσιον καὶ δικαιολογήσασθαι 
πρὸς αὐτὸν map ὑμῖν ἢ παρὰ τῇ γερουσίᾳ' καὶ ἡδέως ἂν ἀμαχὶ 
παρεχώρησα αὐτῷ τῆς ἡγεμονίας, εἰ τοῦτο τῷ κοινῷ συμφέρειν 

"- ~ ~ “σ᾿ , ~ 
ἐδοκεῖ, ὑπὲρ τοῦ κοινοῦ yap Kal πονῶν καὶ κινδυνεύων διατελῶ, 
τοσοῦτόν τε ἐνταυθοῖ χρόνον ἔξω τῆς ᾿Ιταλίας πεποίηκα, ἄνθρω- 





1 4.e. Martius Verus, see below. 
2 He forgot his own precepts ; see Medz/. ix. 42, unless, as 
is possible, the speech came first. 
Dio 71. 34, ὃ 3, οὔτε ἑκὼν οὔτε ἄκων ἐπλημμέλει. cp. 
Aristides, Orat. ad Regem, § 106 (Jebb). 
4 ep. Medit. v. 88. 


348 


THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


Speech tu the drwy on the news of the Revolt of Cisseits, 
175 a.p. 


Marcus, learning of the revolt from Verus, the Guver- 
nor of Cappadocia, kept the news secret for a time, but 
as the soldiers were both yreatly perturbed by the rumour 


and were freely discussing it, he called them toyether and 
read the following speech : 


‘¢T¢ is not, O fellow soldiers, tu give way to resentment 
or lamentations that 1 ain come before you. For what 
avails 1t to be wroth with the Divinity that can do what- 
ever pleaseth Hin? Still, perhaps, they that are un- 
deservedly unfortunate cannot but bewail their lot; and 
that is the case with me now. For it 1s surely a terrible 
thing for us to be engaged in wars upon wars; surely 
it is shocking to be mvolved even in civil strife, and 
surely it 1s more than terrible and more than shocking 
that there 1s no faith to be found among men, and that 
I have been plotted against by one whom I held most 
dear and, although 1 had done no wrong aud com- 
initted no transgression, have been forced intu a conflict 
against my will. For what rectitude shall be held safe, 
what friendship be any longer deemed secure, seemy that 
this has befallen me? Has not Faith utterly perished. 
and good Hope perished with it? Yet I had counted it a 
slight thing, had the danger been mine alone—for assuredly 
f was not born immortal—but now that there has been a 
defection, or rather a revolt, in the state, and the war 
comes home to all of us equally, I would gladly, had it 
been possible, have invited Cassius to argue the question 
out before you or before the Senate, and willingly with- 
out a contest have made way for him in the supreme 
power, had that seemed expedient for the common weal. 
For it 1s only in the public interest that 1 continue to 
incur toil and danger, and have spent so much time here 
beyond the bounds of Italy, an old man as 1 now am 


349 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


2 > ν 4) Ἐ 
Tos καὶ γέρων On! καὶ ἀσθενὴς ᾿ καὶ οὔτε τροφὴν ἀἄλυγγον vb 
Ψ xy ral ͵ 
ὕπνον ἄφροντιν λιβεῖν δυνάμενος, 
» ᾿Ὶ “ ? “~ » 
᾿ Ἐπεὶ δ᾽ οὐκ ἄν ποτε συγκιθεῖναι ἐς τοῦτο ὁ Κάσσιος ἐθελή.- 
ww “Δ ΄ , 7 
TELE, πῶς γὰρ ἂν πιστεύσειέ pol, ἄπιστυς οὕτω περὶ ἐμὲ 
γεγενημένος, ὑμᾶς ye, ὦ συστρατιῶται, χρὴ θαρρεῖν. οὐ γάρ 
, , \ oof . 3 - δ > 7 
mov κρείττους Κίλικες καὶ Zupot καὶ ᾿Ιουδαῖοι καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι 
ὑμῶν οὔτε ἐγένοντό ποτε οὔτε ἔσονται, οὐδ᾽ ἂν μυριάκις πλείους 
ἊΣ ᾿ An , a 
ὑμῶν, ὅσῳ νῦν ἐλάττους εἰσίν, ἀθροισθῶσιν. od μὴν οὐδ᾽ 
3 Ν / > 
αὐτὸς ὁ Κάσσιος, εἰ καὶ τὰ μάλιστα καὶ στρατηγικὸς εἶναι 
καὶ πολλὰ κατωρθωκέναι δοκεῖ, λύγου τινὸς ἄξιος νῦν ἂν φανείη" 
” ‘ γι --ἃ Ἂ λ a a ‘ λέ al € , 3 , 
υὔτε γὰρ ἀετὸς κολοιῶν ἢ καὶ λέων νεβρῶν ἡγησάμενος ἀξιό- 
ὔ A \ bY \ , \ ΠῚ 5 , 
payos γίνεται, καὶ τὸν ᾿Αραβικὸν τόν τε TlupOerdy ἐκεῖνον πό- 
3 7 2 > ¢ ΄ , ” ? 
Aewov ov Κάσσιος ἀλλ᾽ ὑμεῖς κατειργάσασθε. ἄλλως τε, εἰ 
3 -“ ΄“ \ 4 ’ 
Kal ἐκεῖνος ἐκ τῶν πρὸς Ἰάρθους πριχθέντων εὐδύκιμός ἐστιν, 
ca ἊΝ ὰ Ἐπ ἘΣ os 
ἔχετε καὶ ὑμεῖς Οὐῆρον," ὃς οὐδὲν ἧττον ἀλλὰ καὶ μᾶλλον αὐτοῦ 
, , 
καὶ ἐνίκησε πλείω καὶ κατεκτήσατο. 
3 ‘ “a , 
“᾿Αλλὰ τάχα μὲν καὶ ἤδη μετανενόηκε, ζῶντά pe penudnkas: 
> " ν΄ ς ~ 3 t 
οὐ γάρ που Kal ἄλλως ἢ ὡς τετελευτηκότος μου τοῦτ᾽ ἐποίησεν 
“Ὁ \ NY 34 - > ,ὔ 2 2 Ν , 
ἂν δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ πλεῖον ἀντίσχῃ, ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν ye καὶ προσίοντας 
¢ ~ f / \ ¢ “ Ν 4 ‘ 
ἡμᾶς πύθηται, πάντως γνωσιμαχήσει, καὶ ὑμᾶς φοβηθεὶς καὶ ἐμὲ 
5 , > \ na a ῃ , > a“ ᾽ 
αἰδεσθείς. ἐγὼ γοῦν ἕν μόνον δέδοικα, ὦ συστρατιῶται, εἰρήσεται 
“~ “ ¢ 3 / \ > 
γὰρ πᾶσα πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἡ ἀλήθεια, μὴ ἤτοι αὐτὸς ἑαυτὸν ἀποκτείνῃ, 
" AY 3 \ ¢ ya 4 Ἑ ? os “ΔἌὠἌΔἕαν , 6 
αἰσχυνθεὶς ἐς τὴν ἡμετέραν ὄψιν ἐλθεῖν, ἢ ἕτερος μαθών, ὅτι τε 
ei 3 ix “- “ ‘ 4 
ἤξω Kal Ore ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν ὁρμῶμαι, τοῦτο ποιῆσῃ. μέγα yup μον 
> \ ~ 7 Α “ἈΝ 7 Ν ζ ἢ "] Ν , 
ἄθλον καὶ τοῦ πολέμου καὶ τῆς νίκης, καὶ ἡλίκον οὐδεὶς πώποτε 
2 ’ wv ᾿ ΄ t \ af 3 3 ¢ 
ἀνθρώπων ἔλαβεν, ἀφαιρήσεται. τί δὲ τοῦτό ἐστιν ; ἀδικήσαντα 
Ε7 > “ Α ni ς fo ες wx ~ , 
ἄνθρωπον ἀφεῖναι, πρὸς φιλίαν ὑπερβάντα φίλον μεῖναι, πίστιν 
, i wt 8 ΕΠ aN ios ἘΠ 
καταλύσωντι πιστὸν ὁ διαγενέσθαι. παράδοξα μὲν ἴσως ταῦ 
ww . > ΄ “ “ ΄ 
ὑμῖν φαίνεται, AAA’ οὐκ ἀπιστεῖν ὑμᾶς αὐτοῖς δεῖ’ οὐ yap που 





1 He was 54. cp. Thouyhts, i. 17, 8 63 1. 2, 0. 

2 Yet five years more of this anxious and strenuous lite 
were tu be his. ey. Dio, 7}. 22, $ 3. 

> Martius Verus Suidas credits him with tact, slinmess, 
and warlike ability. He gave Marcus the fist news οἱ 


the revolt. t ep. Aledil. ix. 42 
359 


- 


THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


and an mailing, unable to take food without pam, or sleep 
without ware. ᾿ 

“Bub since Cassitls would wever agree to Inet me fu2 
this pun pose—for What faith could he have mime who kept 
go ul his faith to ine ’—you, my fellow suldsers. aust im 
any case be of good cheer. For never, I tuke it, have 
Cihalans and Syrians and Jews and Egyptians been a 
match for you, and never will he, ne, not though their 
muster was as many thousand tunes ΠΙΟΤῸ DUmercus than 
yours as it is now less. Nor need even Uassius lnnself, 
ever so good a commander though he 15 reputed to be, and 
credited with many successful campaigns, be held of any 
great account at the present crisis. Foran e.yle at the 
head of daws iakes no formidable fue, nora lion at the 
head of fawns, and as for the Arabian war and the great 
Parthian war, it was you, not Cassius, who brought them 
to a successful end. Moreover, even if he has wun dis- 
tinction by his Parthian campaigns, you too have Verus. 
who has won not less but even far more victories, anid 
inade greater acquisitions than he 

‘ But perhaps even now, learning that [am alive, he 
has repented of his action ; for surely it was only because 
he believed me dead, that he acted thus. But if he still 
maintain his opposition, yet when he learns that we are 
uideed marching agaist him, he will doubtless take ¢ 
different view both from dread of youand from reverence 
for me I at any rate, fellow soldiers, have but one tear— 
for 1 will tell you the whole truth—that either he should 
take lus own life from very shaine of comimg mto ow 
presence, or that another should slay him, learning buth 
that 1 shall come and that Iam actually setting out against 
lin. or great is the prize of war and of victory—a 
prize such as no one among men has ever won—of 
which I shall he deprived. And what 15 that? To forgive 
a man who has done wrong, to be still a friend to one 
who has trodden friendship underfoot, to continue faithful 
to one who has broken faith. What I say may perhaps 
seem to you incredible, but you must not disbeheve it ; 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


kat ἁπλῶς πάντα τὰ ἀγαθὰ ἐκ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἀπόλωλεν, ἀλλ᾽ 
3 - oF - ~ 
ἔστι καὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ἔτι τῆς ἀρχαίας ἀρετῆς λείψανον. ἂν δέ 
> lad Ἀ “~ aN 
που ἀπιστῇ Tis, Kut διὰ τοῦτο μειζόν ἐστί μοι TO ἐπιθύμημα, 
ig ἁ SON nx , , , n 4 
wa, ὃ μηδεὶς ἂν πιστεύσειε γενέσθαι δύνασθαι, τοῦτο ἴδῃ γε- 
ς aca ΠΥ x ~ nw 
νόμενον. ὡς ἔγωγε τοῦτ᾽ ἂν μύνον ἐκ τῶν παρόντων κιικῶν 
, 5 , cal mn o 
κερδάναιμι, ef δυνηθείην καλῶς θέσθαι τὸ mpdypat καὶ δεῖξαι 
“ 2 χ Ἀ 2 f ld ld 2 “ 
πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις ὅτι καὶ ἐμφυλίοις πολέμοις ἔστιν ὀρθῶς 


χρήσασθαι." --- Dio, 71. 24-26, ὃ 4. 


hie Oratione Marci Antonina (ud Senatuin missa). 


“ Habetis igitur p.c., pro gratulatione victoriae generum 
meum consulem, Pompeianum? dico, cuius aetas olim 
remuneranda fuerat consulatu, nisi viri fortes interven- 
issent, quibus reddi debuit, quod a re publica debebatur. 
Nune quod ad defectionem Cassianain pertinet, vos oro 
atque obsecro, p.c., ut censura vestra cdeposita mean 
pietatemn clementiamyue servetis, immo vestrain, neque 
quelmquam unum senatus occidat. Neimo senatorum pun- 
iatur, nullius fundatur viri nobilis sanguis, deportati 
redeant, prosciipti bona recipant Utinam possem mul- 
tatos etiam ab inferis excitare! Non enim umgquam 
placet in imperatore vindicta sui doloris, quae si iustior 
tuerit, acrior videtur. Quare tiliis Avidii Cassii et genero 
et uxor veniain dabitis. Ht quid dico veniam? Cum ih 
nihil fecerint. Vivant igitur secur: scientes sub Marco 
vivere. Vivant in patrimonio parentum pro parte donato,? 
auro, argento, vestibus fruantur, sint securi, sint vagi et 


' cp. Medit, νι. 2. 

2 Incorrect. This Pompeianus was consul in 173. In 176 
Claud. Pompeianus Quintianus, who married the daughter of 
Verus and Lucilla (see Dio 72. 4,§ 4), was cons. suff. As for 
the victory, there had been no battle, but Cassius after ‘a 
three months’ dream, of empire” was assassinated by one of 
his own soldiers. 


352 


et mete .. ..ὕ.. --........-.- ... .....--.....-.-..... PSone a 


THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


for, I take it, all that 15. good has not vanished utterly 
from among men, but there still1emains among us a vestige 
of plistime virtue. But if any be incredulous, the greater 
even on that account is my desire that he should with his 
own eyes see actually done that which no man would 
believe could be done. For this would be the only gain 
T could get from my present troubles, if I were able to 
bring the matter to an honourable conclusion, and show 
to all the world that even civil war can be dealt with on 
right principles.” + 


From « Speech of Marcus Antoninus (sent to the Senate). 


‘‘In return, then, for your congratulations on our 
victory, Conscript Fathers, you have as consul my son- 
in-law Ponpeianus, whose mature years should long ayo 
have been rewarded with a consulship had not other 
brave men hac prior claims for recognition from the state. 
Now with regard to the rebellion of Cassius, I beg and 
beseech you, Conscript Fathers, to lay aside all thoughts 
of severity and safeguard my or rather your humanity 
and clemency, and let no single person be put to death 
by the Senate. Let no Senator be punished, the blood 
of no man of noble birth be spilt; let the exiles return, 
the proscribed recover their goods. Would that I could 
recall the condemned also from the Shades! For revenge 
for his own wrongs never sits well on an emperor; the 
move it 1s deserved, the more severe 1t seems. So 
you must pardon the sons of Avidius Cassius, and his 
son-in-law, and his wife. But why do Τ say ‘‘ pardon,” 
since they have done no wrong? Let them live, then, 
in security, knowmg that they live under Marcus Let 
them hve on their patrimony proportionately divided , 
let them enjoy their gold, their silver, thei raiment ; 


1 Or, made a right use of. 


“πω το nf gem sf Co et ne 





ὁ Capit. Vit. Marc. axvi. 11, 12: filu Cassi et amphus 
media parte acceperunt paterni patrimoni et auro atque 
argento adiiti. 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


liberi, eb per ora onmiun ubique populorum ciremmferant 
ineae, circumferant vestrae pietatis exemplum. Nec 
magna haec est, p.c., clementia, veniam proscriptorun 
hberis et comugibus dari. ego vero a vobis peto, ut 
conscios senator ordinis et equestris a caede, a pro- 
scriptione, a timore, ab infamia, ab invidia, et postremo 
ah omni vindicetis miuria! detisyue hoe meis temporibus, 
ut in eansa tyrannidis qui in tumultu cecidit, probetuy 
occisus. ’--~Vuleat, Pit, Avid. Cass. xii. 


va “ “ ἴω 
Συγκαλέσας τοὺς φίλους ὅσοι τε παρῆσαν τῶν συγγενῶν καὶ 
» “ ¢ x nm“ 
τὸν παῖδα καταστησάμενος, ἐπειδὴ πάντες συνῆλθον, ἡσυχὴ τοῦ 
, ’ ¢ x , , ΝΑ 
σκίμποδος κουφίσας ἑαυτὸν τοιούτων λύγων ἤρξατο" 


“ Ω “ ’ 
ΟἴΑχθεσθαι μὲν ὑμᾶς ἐφ᾽ οἷς ὁρᾶτέ με διακείμενον, θαυμαστὸν 
3 A ? Α A 2 , :) \ μι + “ las 
οὐδέν: φύσει τε γὰρ τὸ avOpamwov ἐλεεινὸν" ἐν ταῖς τῶν 
ὁμοφύλων συμφοραῖς, τά τε δεινὰ ὑπ᾽ ὄψιν πεσόντα οἰκτον 
προκαλεῖται μείζονα. ἐμοὶ δέ τι καὶ πλέον ὑπάρχειν Tap ὑμῶν 
οἴομαι" ἐκ γὰρ ὧν αὐτὸς διάκειμαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ἀμοιβαίαν εὔνοιαν 
> , »y ~ Ν A 2, 3 2 ¢ \ 
εἰκότως ἤλπικα. νῦν δὲ καιρὸς εὔκαιρος ἐμοί τε αἰσθέσθαι μὴ 
“ 7 ΄ 
μάτην πρὸς ὑμᾶς τοσούτον χρόνου τιμὴν τε καὶ σπουδὴν κατα- 
“ r ~ 7 © id 
τεθεῖσθαι, ὑμῖν τε ἀποδοῦναι χάριν δείξασιν ὅτι ὑπὲρ ὧν ἐτύχετε 
3 3 ω ς “σ , ᾿ ἘΞ ὰ > 2) , 
οὐκ ἀμνημονεῖτε. ὁρᾶτε δή μοι τὸν ὑιόν, ὃν αὐτοὶ ἀνεθρέψασθε, 
3, ~ , nr , 3 8 , 3 Ν ὃ / 4 3 
ἄρτι τῆς μειρακίων ἡλικίας émtBaivovra,® καὶ δεόμενον ὥσπερ ἐν 
“ 4 “A a rf ΕἸ 
χειμῶνι καὶ ζάλῃ τῶν κυβερνησόντων, pn ποι φερόμενος ὑπ 





1 This frigid rhetoric does nut savour of Marcus. 

2 Pity was scouted by the sterner Stoics; but see Afedi. 
ii. 13. 

> Commodus would be nineteen, but μειράκιον means 
a boy of fourteen or fifteen. Would ἀποβαίνοντα, unless 


354 


THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


let them: be unmolested, let them be free to cume and gu 
as they please, and ἰοῦ thein bear witness among all 
peoples everywhere to ivy humanity and yours ΝῸΣ is 
this any great clemency, Ὁ Conseript Fathers, that the 
children and wives of the proscribed should be pardoned : 
but what I ask of you 1s that you should shield all 
accomplices of Cassius amony the Senators or Knights 
from death, proseription, apprehension, deyradation, 
hatied and in fact from all injury, and grant this glory 
to iny reign, that ina iebellion against the throne death 
should overtake only those who have fallen i the revolt.” 


The Lust Words of Murcus. 


Calling together his friends and as many of his relations 
as were at hand, and setting his child before them, 
when all had come together, he raised himself vently 
on his pallet-bed, and beyan to speak as follows . 


‘That you should be grieved at seeing me in this state 
is not surprising, for 1t is natural to mankind tou pity the 
misfortunes of then kinsfolk, and the calamities which 
fall under our own eyes call forth greater compassion. 
But I think that something even more will be forthcoming 
from you to me; for the consciousness of my feelings 
towards you has led me to hope for a recompense of good- 
will fromm you. But now the time is well-tiuned both for 
me to learn that I have not lavished love and esteein 
upon you in vain for all these years, and for you by 
showing your gratitude to prove that you are not un- 
mindful of the benefits you have received. You see here 
my son, whose bringing-up has been in your own hands, just 
embarking upon the age of manhood and, hke a ship amid 
storm and breakers, in need of those who shall guide the 
helm, lest in his want of experience of the right course 


it clashes with the inetaphor that follows, meet the 
difficulty ” 


355 


MARCUS ΑΒΕ 


ἀτελοῦς τῆς τῶν» δεόντων ἐμπειρίας és φαῦλα ἐπιτηδεύματα 
o~ , i > 3 na ft " > > ¢ κ 5 - 
προσαμαχθῇ. γίνεσθε δὴ οὖν αὐτῷ ὑμεῖς ἀνθ᾽ ἑνὸς ἐμοῦ πατέρες 
7 Α 2, 3, 
πολλοί, περιέποντές TE καὶ TU ἄμιστα συμβουλείωντες. οὔτε 
͵ “ > 7 
yap χρημάτων πλῆθος οὐδὲν αὔταρκες πρὸς τυραννίδος dxpur- 
, ” 8 , 1 ¢ \ ς» 6 ‘ 2) > 
iav, οὔτε δορυφόρων φρουρὰ ἱκανὴ ῥύεσθαι τὸν ἄρχοντα, εἰ 
4 . ¢ “" “ 
μὴ προὐπάρχει ἡ τῶν ὑπηκόων εὔνοια. μάλιστα δὲ ἐκεῖνοι ἐς 
> “ “ > , 9 
ἀρχῆς μῆκος ἀκινδύνως ἤλασαν," ὅσοι μὴ φόβον ἐξ ὠμότητος, 
? 4 n~ ¢ ~ ~ “΄- . nm 
πόθον δὲ τῆς αὑτῶν χρηστύτητος ταῖς τῶν ἀρχομένων ψυχαῖς 
3 ld 
ἐνέσταξαν. ov γὰρ οἱ ἐξ ἀνάγκης δουλεύοντες GAN οἱ μετὰ 
wn a 3 f 4 
πειθοῦς ὑπακούοντες ἀνύποπτοι καὶ ἔξω κολακείας προσποιῆτον 
j 
~ / “ 
δρῶντές τε καὶ πάσχοντες διατελοῦσιν, καὶ οὐδέ ποτε ἀφηνιάζ- 
x 4 , , ὦ 2 4 ~ 2) ‘ ‘ 
ουσιν, ἣν μὴ βίᾳ καὶ ὕβρει ἐπὶ τοῦτο ἄχθωσι. χαλεπὸν δὲ 
oF ~ f 
μετριάσαι τε καὶ dpav ἐπιθεῖναι ἐπιθυμίαις ὑπηρετούσης ἐξ- 
“- , “a > 
ουσίας. τοιαῦτα δὴ συμβουλεύοντες αὐτῷ, καὶ ὧν ἀκούει παρὼν 
~ n ΄“ ta > ,ὔ 
ὑπομνήσκοντες, ὑμῖν τε αὐτοῖς καὶ πᾶσιν ἄριστον ἀποδείξετε 
- a ~ 7 
βασιλέα, τῇ τε ἐμῇ μνήμῃ χαριεῖσθε τὰ μέγιστα, οὕτω τε 
, ς ~ ’ 4 * « 
μόνως ἀίδιον αὐτὴν ποιῆσαι Suvjcecbe.”—Herodian, i, 4, ὃ 2. 








ι Dio (72 1. 1) says Commodus was by nature &karos, but 
from tuo great ἁπλύτης (cp 71. 22 3) and cowardice easily 
influenced by lis entourage, and was thus by ignorance led 
into bad ways. See also Julian, Conriv. 429, 14, 

“ep. Vule. Gall. Vet. Cass vin. Ὁ. 


356 


THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


he should be dashed upon the ruck of evil habits. Be ye 
therefore to him many fathers in the place of me, his one 
father, takiny care of him and giving him the best counsel. 
For neither can any wealth, however abundant, suffice 
for the incontinence of a tyranny, nor a bodyguard be 
strong enough to protect the ruler, unless he has first of 
all the good-will of the governed For those iulers 
complete a long course of suvranty without danger 
who instil into the hearts of their subjects not fear by 
thew cruelty, but love by their goodness. For 1t 1s not 
those who serve as slaves under compulsion, but those 
who are obedient from persuasion, that are above suspicion. 
and continue dug and being done by without any cloak 
of flattery, and never show restiveness unless driven to it 
by violence and outiage. And it is ditheidt to check and 
put a just hit to our desires when Power is thew minister. 
By giving ny son then such advice, and bringmyg to his 
memory what he now hears with his own ears, you will 
vender hun both for yourselyes and all mankind the best 
of kings, and you will do my memory the greatest of 
services, and thus alone he enabled to make 10 immortal.” 

5 This aspiration does not tally with the repeated denuneia- 
tious of fame in the Meditations ni. 103 ν 19, 33, τί δὲ 
Kal ἔστιν ὅλως τὸ ἀείμνηστον, ὅλον κενόν. 


THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


INTRODUCTION 


Noruina lets us mto the secret of a inan’s character 
better than httle anecdotes about hin, and even seemingly 
trivial sayings uttered by ln without any thoughts of a 
listening posterity. Unfortunately few such remimiscences 
of Marcus ave extant, but the little that remains will be 
found to throw some light on a character which it has 
become too much the fashion to accuse of feebleness, 
criminal complaisance and inefliciency on the one hand, 
and on the other of harshness and cruelty. No support 
is given here to either of these mutually destructive 
views of a personality that was a striking combination of 
‘sweetness and gravity,’! of mildness and tenacity, of 
justice and mercy. We see a truly religious man who 
lived up to his creed,” a tempered Stoicisin. 


1 Medat.1 15. 
2 Dio 71. 30, § 23 Phil. Vet. Soph. ii. 11 (p. 242 Kayser) ; 
CLD. ii. 6278 = Hph. Eyoyr. vir 385. 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


(1) Cupit. iv. 7. 

Post hoc patrimonium paternum sorori! totum con- 
cessit, cum eum ad divisionem mater vocaret, respondit- 
que ‘‘ avi bonis se esse contentum,” addens ‘‘ ut et mater, 
si vellet, in sororem suum patrimonium conferret, ne 
inferior esset soror marito.’’? 


(2) Capit. υ. 3, 4. 


Ubi autem comperit se ab Hadriano 5 adoptatum, magis 
est deterritus quam laetatus, iussusque in Hadriani priv- 
atam domum migrare invitus de maternis hortis | recessit. 
Cumque ab eo domestici quaererent, cur tristis in adopt- 
ionem regiam transiret, disputavit ‘‘quae mala mm se 
contineret imperium.” 


(3) Capit. χαυΐ. 7. 
Sententia Platonis® semper in ore illius fuit, ‘‘ Florere 
͵ 
civitates, si aut philosophi imperarent aut imperantes 
philosopharentur.” 


(4) Dio 71. 34, ὃ 4 = Suidas sub voce Μάρκος. 


΄ , , > 7 # 
Ei μέν τις χρηστόν τι ἔπραττεν, ἐπήνει καὶ ἔχρητο ἐς ἐκεῖνο 


Te,” τῶν δὲ ἐτέ ὺ ἐποιεῖτο, λέ ὅτι ** ποιῇ : 
αὐτῷ," τῶν δὲ ἑτέρων ov προσεποιεῖτο, λέγων ὅτι ““ ποιῆσαι μέν 


1 His only sister Cornificia. 2 Ummidius Quadratus. 

3 Schulz supplies Antomno wuctore before Hadriano. 

4 These ‘‘ Gardens,’ that is, Lucilla’s private residence in 
its own private grounds, were probably on the Caelian hull. 

5 Plato, Rep. 473 p, quoted also by Cicero in lis letter to 
his brother Quintus, de provincia admiustrandd, 

6 A lesson learnt from Pius; see whore, i. 16, § 6. 


360 


THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


(i) 

Arter this! he gave up to his sister all that he had in- 
herited from his father, though his mother invited him to 
share it equally.and rephed that he was content with being 
his gra ndfather’s heir, adding that his mother loo, 1} she 
weie willing, should bestow her property apon his sister, 
that has sister might be on an equahity with her husband. 


(2) 

When however he learnt that he had been adopted 
by Hadrian, he was more abashed than pleased, and 
when bidden to migrate to Hadrian's private house, he 
left his mother’s mansion with regrel. And when the 
household asked him why he took lus adoption into the 
royal house so sadly, he enlarged upon the erils insepeur- 
able from sovran power. 


(3) 
The sentence of Plato was for ever on his lips: [ell 


ans 16 for states, if either philosophers ivere rulers or rulers 
philosophers.” 


(4) 


If anyone did anything excellent, he praised him and 
utilized him for that, but did not expect other things 
from hun, sayy, Lf is ruupossible to make men exactly as 

1 About 136 A.p., when Marcus was 15 

2 Aur. Victor (De Caes. xv. 3) applies the saying to Pius. 
Justin was well advised therefore mn his Apology (i. 3), 
addressed to Pius and Marcus, m quoting the similar 
aphorism : ἔφη που καί τις τῶν παλαίων ἂν μὴ οἱ ὄρχοντες φιλο- 
σοφήσωσι καὶ οἱ ἀρχόμενοι, οὐκ ἂν εἴη τὰς πόλεις εὐδαιμονῆσαι 








261 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


‘ 4, ξ΄ ~ 
τινι ἀνθρώπους ὁποίους βούλεται ἔχειν ἀδύνατόν éort,! rots δὲ 
4 > ¢ 3 δ 3, > « - ~ 7 
δὴ οὖσι προσήκει, ἐς ὅ τι ἄν τις αὐτῶν τῷ κοινῷ χρήσιμος 
> ~ » 
ἢ, χρῆσθαι. 


(5) Capit. ani. 3, 4. 

Semper cum optimatibus non solum bellicas res sed 
etiam civiles, priusquam faceret aliquid, contulit. Deni- 
que sententia illus praecipua semper haec fuit: ‘‘ Aequius 
est, ut ego tot talium amicorum ? consilium sequar, quam 
ut tot tales amici meam unius voluntatem sequantur.” 


(6) Dio, 71. 29, § 8. 


7 r 
Οὕτω ye πόρρω παντὸς φόνου καθειστήκει ὥστε Kai λεόντά 
’ὔ B ~ 
τινα δεδιδαγμένον ἀνθρώπους ἐσθίειν ἐκέλευσε μὲν ἐπαχθῆναι 
Ἄ 4 “ , »” \ 93 a Τὸ Ὁ \ ὃ ὃ , 
αἰτησαμένου τοῦ δήμου, οὔτε δὲ ἐκεῖνον εἶδεν οὔτε τὸν διδασκα- 
- , “ > 
λον αὐτοῦ ἠλευθέρωσε, καίπερ ἐπὶ πολὺ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἐγκει- 
, a , ¢ > ld 
μένων ol, ἀλλὰ Kat κηρυχθῆναι προσέταξεν ὅτι ““ οὐδὲν ἄξιον 
aN θ ’ , 2» 2 
ἐλευθερίας πεποίηκεν. 


(7) Capit. vir. 8. 
De qua (sc. Faustina) cum diceretur Antonino Marco, 
ut eam vepudiaret, si non occideret, dixisse fertur : ‘‘ Si 


τ See above, ix. 42, and cp. vii. 7. 

* Amict was a usual name for the Coneiliwm, οὐ Privy 
Council, of the Emperor, a body of advisers first organized 
by Hadrian, and they may be meant here. Of a difficult 
case, where his own interests were involved, Marcus says to 
Fronto (Ad Caes i. 17): ““ Duas res animo meo carissimas 
secutus sum, rationem veram et sententiam tuam. Di velint, 
ut semper quod agam, secundo iudicio tuo agam.” 

3 The jurist Paulus (Dig xl. 9. 17) tells us that Marcus 
‘‘prohibuit ex acclamatione populi manumittere”; cp. 
Cod. vii, 11 3 Fronto (Ad Caes. i. 8) seems to imply that 
Pius was more indulgent in this matter. 


362 





THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


one wishes them to be, but at 18. our duty to utilize them, 
such as they are, for any service in which they can be useful 
to the convmon weal. 


(5) 

Not only in military but also in civil affairs, before 
doing anything, he always consulted the chief men of 
the State. In fact this was ever a favourite saying of 
his: Zé 7s fuirer that £ should follow the advice of friends 
so many and so wise, than that Friends so aise and so 
many should follow my single will} 


(6) 

So averse from all bloodshed was his disposition that, 
though at the people’s request he allowed a lon trained 
to devour men to be mtroduced into the arena, yet he 
not only refused to look at it himself or to enfranchize its 
trainer, in spite of a persistent demonstration of the 
audience agaist him, but even had it proclaimed that 
the man had done nothing to deserve freedom.” 


(7) 


When 1t was said to Marcus Antoninus of his wife, 
that he should divorce her, if he did not slay her, he is 
reported to have said, If we dismiss the wife, let us also 


< 


.--.-.-.ὄ.-. tt Nt ........-. .  .. ...-..... ...-.-. pte at Rit Rt EN 





lem, Capit. xi. 10, where we are told that Marcus 
consulted his praefect? (i.e. praetor7o) and rehed esp- 
ecially on the jurist Scaevola In the Digest he calls 
Rusticus, Volusins Maecianus and Salvins Julianus amici. 
A maxim of Ins was Blush not to be helped (Medit. vii 7); 
cp. also Fronto, Ad Cues i. 17, ‘‘ post consultationem 
amicorum.” 

* Yet his bias towards the enfranchisement of slaves was 
notorious. See Digest, xxxvin. 4.3. “‘quod videlicet tavore 
constitiwt libertatis ” 


363 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


uxorem dimittimus, reddamus et dotem.”’! Dos autem 
quid habebatur nisi imperium, quod ille ab socero 
volente Hadriano adoptatus acceperat. 


(8) Digest iv. 2.13 = axlviit. 7. 7 (Callistretus). 

Cum Mayrcianus diceret, ‘‘ Vim nullam feci,” Caesar 
dixit, ‘‘ Tu vim putas solum si homines vulnerentur? Vis 
est eb tune quotiens quis id, quod deberi putat, non per 
iudicem reposcit. Non puto autem nec verecundiae nec 
dignitati nec pietati tuae convenire quicyuam non iure 
facere.”’ 


(9) Galen, wir. 658 (ΑἸ). 


“ Ψ " " a y 
Τῷ δὲ Πειθολάῳ " εἶπεν ““ ἰατρὸν ἔχειν ἔνα καὶ τοῦτον ἐλεύδ.- 
» # ὃ aN Q Ὗ a λ ΄ ΣΝ 46 \ Ν » ~ 
epov, πάνυ διετέλει Te περὶ ἐμοῦ λέγων ἀεὶ ““τὸν μὲν ἰατρῶν 


πρῶτόν «με!» εἶναι τῶν δὲ φιλοσόφων μόνον ” 


(10) Doo, 71. 3. ὃ = Fragin. Dond. v. p. 206. 
=Zonaras xu. 2. 


Καίτοι δὲ ἰσχυροτάτον ἀγῶνος καὶ λαμπρᾶς νίκης yeyevn- 
μένης, ὅμως ὁ αὐτοκράτωρ αἰτηθεὶς παρὰ τῶν στρατιωτῶν οὐκ 
ἔδωκε χρήματα, αὐτὸ τοῦτο εἰπὼν ὅτι ““ὅσῳ ἂν πλεῖον παρὰ τὸ 
καθεστηκὸς λάβωσι, τοῦτο ἐκ τοῦ αἵματος τῶν τε γονέων σφῶν 
καὶ τῶν συγγενῶν ἐσπεπράξεται: περὶ yap τοι τῆς αὐταρχίας ὁ 


tet em -.ὄ .-..ὺὃ..---. . οὕβ ......-.......--.-.......- enantio 





! The same thing had been said long before by Burrhus to 
Nero of his wife Octavia, and in that case was applicable, 
but it was not so in this, and besides Marcus was devoted to 
his wife to the last. See above, 1.17, § 7; Capit. xxv 4 ἢ; 
Dio, 71. 30, § 1. 

2 One of the court physicians, who had been utterly wrong 
in their diagnosis of the illness of Marcus, while Galen had 
_ accurately civined it hy merely feeling the patient’s pulse. 


364 


THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


surrende, the duiwry But what was meant by the dowry 
if not the Empire, which he had received when adupted 
by his father-in-law at Hadrian’s wish ὁ} 


(8) 

When Marcianus said, ‘‘I have done no yvivlence,”’ 
Caesar said, Do you think that violence is shewn only if 
men are wounded ὁ There is violence then also, arhenever εἰ 
mun demands bach whut he thinks due to him otherwise 
than by judicial process. But 1 do not think αὐ consistent 
with either your inodesty or your dignity or your loyalty to 
the stute that wont should do unything except legally 


(9) 

And he said to Peitholaus that he had bué one physician 
and he was a free imeun, and he went on to say repeatedly 
about me that I was the fist of physicians and the only 
philoso pher.* 


(10) 


And yet, though a most stubborn contest had been 
followed by a brilliant victory, nevertheless, when peti- 
tioned by the soldiers, the Emperor refused to give them 
a largess, saying only this, that the more they received 
beyond their fived pay, the more would be wrung from the 
life-bluod of their parents und hinsfolk; for in the matter 





1 Marcus did not receive the Empire through Pius, but by 
Hadrian’s direct nomination. The latter arranged for Marcus 
to marry Fabia, the sister of Lucius Commodus, but Pius broke 
this arrangement in favour of his own daughter Faustina. 
She inherited an immense patrimonium from her father for 
Marcus. 

2 Galen was one of the most remarkable men of ancient 
times. 


365 


MARCOS AURELIUS 


1 τὰ ‘ , 4 3 
οὕτω καὶ σωφμόνω: καὶ ἐγκρατ- 


4 , , ! ” 
Beds μόνον κρίνειν δύναται. 
 “ rat “ὌΝ 
ὥς αὐτῶν ἦρχεν ὥστε, καίπερ ἐν τοσούτοις καὶ τηλικούτοις 

΄ ἢ Ν 4 - ΄ 
πολέμοις ὦν, μηδὲν ἔξω τοῦ προσήκοντος μητ᾽ ἐκ κολακείας 


Ἂ ~ b} 3 ’ - .“} 
εἰπεῖν pant ἐκ φόβου ποιῆσαι." 


(11) Philostratus, Vit. Soph. ii. 1, p. 242, Kayser. 


e “ 4, e ἐ 
Ὑπὸ τούτον δὴ τοῦ πάθους ἔκῴρων ὁ Ἡρώδης ἐγένετο καὶ 
»λθ 3 4 » a ὃ , ,, »Ἤ \ ΄ 
παρῆλθεν ἐς τὸ βασιλεῖον δικαστήριον ὅ οὔτε ἔννους καὶ θανάτον 
> “ cal 
ἐρῶν. παρελθὼν yap καθίστατο ἐς διωβολὰς τοῦ αὐτοκράτορος 
Ν , > , 
οὐδὲ σχηματίσας τὸν λόγον, ws εἰκὸς ἦν ἄνδρα γεγυμνασμένον 
-“ “ ΄ “ 2 
τῆς τοιᾶσδε ἰδέας μεταχειρίσασθαι τὴν ἑαυτοῦ χολήν, GAA 
> , er ei , aA ΄ 
ἀπηγκωνισμένῃ τῇ γλώττῃ καὶ γυμνῇ διετείνετο λέγων “"" ταῦτα 
Δ ., , ͵ 
μοι ἡ Λουκίου ξενία, ὃν σύ μοι ἔπεμψας" ὅθεν δικάζεες, γυνεικι 
ca \ ~ 
με καὶ τριετεῖ παιδίῳ katayapiCipevos.” Βασσαίου δὲ τοῦ 
id 4 , ΄ > “ , e o¢ "ὃ 
πεπιστευμένου TO Eidos θάνατον αὐτῷ φήσαντος ὁ Ἡροιδὴης 
ςς 5 a 204% (a4 ΄ ὟΝ ἢ] cal 2} ¢ s > Le 
ὦ Adare,” ἔφη, “᾿ γέρων ὀλίγα φοβεῖται. ὁ μὲν οὖν ἀπῆλθε 
~ ᾽ s , ~ ‘ 
τοῦ δικαστηρίου εἰπών ταῦτα Kal μετέωρον καταλείψας πολὺ 
~ ee 1 € 6 ‘ ἴω Σ , Ὁ ‘ 
τοῦ ὕδατος, ἡμεῖς δὲ τῶν ἐπιδήλως τῷ Μάρκῳ Φφιλοσοφη- 
’ \ \ 4 / / ) \ 
θέντων καὶ τὰ περὶ τὴν δίκην ταύτην ἡγώμεθα" ov yap ξυνήγαγε 


— an eet ae tenes .ν...ἕὲ..........-.ἄ...-..͵......-ς.. ---ο-ς.. ------ 





1 The other version has: τὸ δὲ κράτος τῆς αὐταρχίας οὐκ ἐν 
τοῖς στρατιώταις ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῷ Θεῷ κεῖται 

2 cp. Aristides (Ad Meg. 8.116, Jebb.): καὶ μὴν τὰ μὲν πρὸς 
πολεμίους ἀνδρείοις πολλοῖς ὑπῆρξε γενέσθαι, ὑπὸ δὲ τῶν σφετέρων 
στρατιωτῶν αὐτοὺς ἄρχεσθαι «μᾶλλον; ἢ κρατεῖν" ὁ δὲ οὕτω 
ῥᾳδίως ἐκράτησε καὶ κατεστήσατο, ὥστε πολλῶν μὲν καὶ ἀπείρων 
ὄντων τῶν δεδομένων αὐτοῖς, χαλεπῶν δὲ καὶ φοβερῶν εἰ μὴ 
τοσαῦτα λαμβάνειν, οὐκ ἐπηύξησε (MS ἐπηῦξε) τὰς ἐπιθυμίας 
αὐτῶν K.T.A. 

ὁ The trial took place at Sumium in Pannonia about 
170 a.D., Herodes being accused of cruel and illegal conduct 
at Athens. He had been accused by the same persons of 
similar malpractices nearly thirty years before (see Fronto, 
Ad Caes. in. 2-6). This Herodes was an Athenian [fanous 
for his riches, his generosity, and his oratory. He had been 
the teacher of Marcus in Greek rhetoric. 

+ The water-clock that timed the speakers in a trial. 


366 


THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


indeed of his socranty God alone evuld be yudye With 
such wisdom and self-coinmand did he rule them that, 
though engaged mso many and such great wars, he never 
swerved from what was right so as either to say anything 
from flattery or do anything from fear.! 


(11) 


Herodes was driven frantic by this calamity * and came 
up to the Emperor’s seat of judgment no longer in his 
right mind and mm love with death. For coming forward 
he set himself to rail at the Kmperor, and without 
ineasuring his words or keeping his anger m hand, as 
might have been expected from one who was practised in 
speaking, but In defiant and unbridled language he gave 
vent to his passion, saying ‘‘ This 1s all that comes of ny 
friendship with Lucius,’ whom you sent to me, that in 
judging me you gratify your wife and three-year old 
οἶα. Ὁ But when Bassaeus,? who had been invested 
with the power of capital punishment, threatened him 
with death, Herodes said, ‘‘ My fine fellow, an old man 
has httle more to fear.” Saying this he left the court 
without availing himself of his full time for speaking. 
But in our opimion the conduct of Marcus at this trial too 
was signally in keeping with his philosophical tenets ; for 





errr tenn ae --- —. Ne ee eater enmeemeniaentnenshatenen tame caantemihenesmentnatemmemnen .ἘἜἌὌςς.--.-.-..-. 


' This incident recorded by Dio belongs to the earher stage 
of the Marcomannic war, when the Eniperor was m great 
straits for money. 

3 The calamity was the death by hghtuimy of his adopted 
daughters, the children of Alcimedon. 

2 Lucius Verus, the colleague of Marcus, who had died 
about a year betore. He stayed with He1odes on his way to 
the East in 162 

4 Vibia Sabina, the last child of Marcus, who with 
Faustina, hence called Mater Castrorum, was with him at 
Sirmium. 

5 Bassaeus Rufus, praetorian prefect 168-177. 


367 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


τὰς ὀφρῦς, οὐδὲ ἔτρεψε τὸ ὄμμα, ὃ κἂν διαιτήτης τιν ἔπαθεν, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιστρέψας ἑαυτὸν ἐς τοὺς ᾿Αθηναίους “" ἀπολογεῖσθςε," 
=} oy ’ ad 5 a“ 

ἔφη, “᾿ὦ ᾿Αθηναῖοι, εἰ καὶ μὴ ξυγχωρεῖ Ἡρώδης." καὶ 
5 7 > 7 3 UA » Ἂ: 3 ~ ΕἼ) 
ἀκούων ἀπολογουμένων ἐπὶ πολλοῖς μὲν ἀφανῶς ἤλγησεν, 
ἰναγιγνωσκομένης δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ ᾿Αθηναίων ἐκκλησίας, ἐν 7 
ἀναγιγνωσκομένης δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ nvaiwy ἐκκλησίας, ἐν 7 
3 ᾽ / a , ς \ ey “ 
ἐφαίνοντο καθαπτόμενοι τοῦ Ἡρώδου, ὡς τοὺς ἄρχοντας τῆς 
“Ἑλλάδος ὑποποιουμένου πολλῷ τῷ μέλιτι, καί mov καὶ βεβοη- 

t é 


f > “ \ 
κότες ‘*@ πικροῦ μέλιτος" καὶ πάλιν “" 


μακάριοι οἱ ἐν τῷ λοιμῷ 
ἀποθνήσκοντες, ᾽᾽ οὕτως ἐσείσθη τὴν καρδιὰν ὑφ᾽ ὧν ἤκουσεν, ὡς 
ἐς δάκρυα φανερὰ ὑπαχθῆναι. τῆς δὲ τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων ἀπολογίας 
ἐχούσης κατηγορίαν τοῦ τε Ἡρώδου καὶ τῶν ἀπελευθέρων τὴν 
ὀργὴν ὁ Μάρκος ἐς τοὺς ἀπελευθέρους ἔτρεψε κολάσει χρησά- 
μένος ὡς οἷον ἐπιεικεῖ, οὕτω γὰρ αὐτὸς χαρακτηρίζει τὴν ἑαυτοῦ 
κρίσιν, μόνῳ δὲ ᾿Αλκιμέδοντι τὴν τιμωρίαν ἐπειινῆκεν ‘‘ ἀποχρῶ- 
σαν εἶναι of” φήσας “᾿ τὴν ἐπὶ τοῖς τέκνοις συμφοράν. ταῦτα 


μὲν δὴ ὧδε ἐφιλοσοφεῖτο τῷ Μάρκῳ. 


(12) Themistius, Orat. 15. 1910. 


~ ce € 

᾿Αντωνίνῳ TH Ῥωμαίων αὐτοκράτορι, ᾧ τούτῳ αὐτὸ ἐπώνυμον 
if > ν 3, 5. ὦ a ’ ey , » “ἡ 
ὁ Ἐὐσεβὴς᾽᾽ ἢν,2 τοῦ στρατεύματος ὑπὸ δίψους [αὐτῷ] 
a » \ Ν ες ¢ \ \ \ 2 
πιεζομένου, ἀνασχὼν τὼ χεῖρε ὁ βασιλεὺς πρὸς τὸν οὐρανόν 
εἰ , 926 bb “ Ν 2 , N ¢ + ‘ 
ταύτῃ ᾿ ἔφη “TH χειρὶ προὐτρεψάμην σε καὶ ἱκέτευσα τὸν 
a A @ ‘ ᾽ 3 , 2) N a n \ 
ζωῆς Sornpa, 7 ζωὴν οὐκ ἀφειλόμην. καὶ οὕτω κατήδεσε τὸν 
“ “ Θ , € ~ ~ 
θεὸν τῇ εὐχῇ ὥστε ἐξ αἰθρίας ἧκον νεφέλαι ὑδροφοροῦσαι τοῖς 


στρατιώταις. 


--......ἕ --..ῦϑΘϑ Ἑ .ϑ. meet ..ὄ lee tah .....- ream re eerie te NL RIM τ kde πο. πάτα το τ... .......ὃ..... a 


1 Perhaps ἐγκλήσεως. 
2 This was the peculiar cognomen of Pius, but Marcus 
sometunes receives it even In inscriptions. 


368 


THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


he did not frown, or so much as turn his eyes, as even an 
arbitrator might have done, but turning to the Athenians 
suid: MMuhe your pleu, inen of Athens, even though Herodes 
is not for allowing you to du sv. And as he listened to 
their case, at many pvints he was secretly grieved, but 
when the complamt of the Athenian Assembly was 
being read to him, in which they openly attacked 
Herodes for trying to win over the Governors of Greece 
with many honeyed words, and somewhere or other even 
cried out, ‘*O bitter honey!” and again, ‘‘ Happy they 
that perish in the pestilence!’ he was so deeply moved 
by what he heard, that he was brought to tears m the 
sight of all. But as the case of the Athenians comprised 
aun accusation ayainst lis freedmen as well as against 
Herodes, Marcus diverted his anger on to the treedmen, 
punishing them however as leniently as possible—for 
that is how he himself characterizes his sentence,-—but 
to Alcimedon alone he remitted the punishment, alleging 
that his calamity in respect of his children was punishment 
enough.! In a way then thus worthy of a philosopher 
did Marcus act on this occasion. 


(12) 


When the army of Antonmus the Roman Emperor, 
who also had the cognomen of Pius, was perishig of 
thirst,” the king, raising both his hands to heaven, 
said, With this hand, wherewith 1 have tahen away no 
life, lurve 1 implored Thee and besought the Gurer of life. 
And he so prevailed with God by his prayer that upon 
a clear sky there came up clouds bringmg rain to his 
soldiers. 


1 ep. his words in the Dryest, 1.18. 14: his madness as a2 
itsel? punishment enough. 

2 At the time of the so-called ‘‘ miraculous victory ” over 
the Quadi in 174; see Dio, 71 8. 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


(13) Ammewius dfarcelldvus, wei. 5. 


Cuin Palaestinain transivet Aegyptum petens Judae- 
ovum foctentium et tumultuautium saepe taedio percitus 
dolenter dicitur exclamasse, “Ὁ Marcomanni, Ὁ Quadi, 
O Sarmatae, tandem alios vobis inertiores! inveuni.”” 


(14) Div, Fragm. Dind. v. ». 206. 


¢ ΄ a 
Ort παρασκευαζομένου τοῦ Μάρκου 3 εἰς τὸν κατὰ Κασσίου 
ἮΝ 0} / \ ᾿ IQ 7 ’ 
πόλεμου οὐδεμίαν βαρβαρικὴν συμμαχίαν ἐδέξατο καίτοι 
“ 7 ”~ ? ΄“ “ 
πολλῶν συνδραμόντων αὐτῷ, λέγων "μὴ χρῆναι τοῖς βωρ- 
βάροις εἰδέναι τὰ μεταξὺ “Ῥωμαίων κινούμενα κακά." 


(15) Vale. Gallicanus, Vit. Cass. viii. 


Caput e1us ad Antoninum cum delatum esset, ile non 
exultavit, non elatus est, sed etiam doluit ‘‘ereptam sibi 
esse occasionenl misericordiae,’ cum diceret ‘*se vivum 
illum voluisse capere. ut Wla exprobraret beneficia sua 
eumque servaret.” Denique cum quidam diceret repre- 
hendenduin Antoninuin, quod tam mitis esset m hostem 
suum eiusque liberos et adfectus atyue omnes, «uos 
conscios tyrannidis repperisset, addente illo qui repre- 
hendebat ‘‘Quid si ille vicisset ?” dixisse dicitur: ‘Non 
sic deos coluumus nec sic vivimus, ut ille nos vinceret.”’ 
Enumeravit deinde ‘‘ omnes principes, yui occisi essent, 
habuisse causas quibus mererentur occidi nec quemquam 
facile bonum vel victuin a tyranno vel occisuim, dicens 





...........ψϑβ..................ὕ»ὕὕ.... ...-..ς..---.-Ἐ.ὄ Φ.-ο--.. -. ---.ς... ----- 





1 This word is doubtful, another reading being detiores. 
Suggested emendations are engeuietiores, meptiores. 
2 This should be in the nomimative case. 


37° 


THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


(13) 


When he was crossing Palestine on his way to Egypt, 
constantly moved with disgust af the unsavoury and 
turbulent Jews, he 1s said to have cried out, O ALiaco- 
meni, O Quadi, O Sarmatians, at length have £ found 
olhers more rseless than you! 


(14) 


When Marcus was inakmg preparations for the war 
against Cassius he would not accept any aid from bar- 
hanians, though many off-red him their services, sayiny 
that the buibarrdits mio not hnow lhe troubles that were 
beiny stirred up bebween Romans.” 


(15) 


When the head of Cassius was brought to him, Anton- 
inus shewed no exultation or pride, but even lamented 
that he had been robbed of un opportunily for contpussion, 
jor he had wished tu tuhe hin alive, he said, that he might 
reprouch hia with the denefils he had done him, and then 
spare has dife. Lastly when one said that Antoninus was 
to blame for his clemency toward his enemy and his 
enemy's children and relations and all whom he had 
found to be accomplices in the usurpation, the man who 
had nnputed the blame going on to say, ‘‘ What if he had 
been successful?” Marcus 1s said to have answered, Ady 
uorship of the Gods has not been such, wy life is not such, 
lhut he could be successfid. He then, enumerating all the 
Emperors who had been killed, pointed out that they had 
deserved their fate, and that no yood Hinperor hud easily 
Leen overcume by ὦ usurper or slain, adding that Neio had 


1 The date would be 176. 

2 So in the Boer War, in view of the native question 11 
South Africa, England refused to employ her Indian and 
Maori troops. 


.»» ---.ὕ.ὄὄ.... ..---.............-..-...... 


371 
BB 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


merusse Neronem, debuisse Caligulain, Othonem et 
Vitellum non imperare voluisse.”! Etiam de Galba 
paria sentiebat, cum diceret ‘Sim umperatore avaritiam 
esse acerbisshuuimn ἡ. Denigue non Augustuin, non 
Traianum, non Hadmanum, non patrem suum a rebellibus 
potuisse superari, cum et multi fuerint et ipsis vel invitis 
vel inscus exstincti.”” Tpse autem Antoninus a senatu 
petill, ‘‘ne graviter m conscios defectionis animadverte- 
retur,” eo 1pso tempore, quo royavit, ‘‘ne quis senator 
temporibus suis capitali supplicio adficerctur,” quod ili 
maximum aimorem conciliavit. 


(16) Philostratus, Vit. Soph. di. 9, ». 252. Kays. 


ἴω 


‘ ’ “ 
Οἰκιστὴν δὲ καὶ τὸν ᾿Αριστείδην τῆς Σμύρνης etree οὐκ 
ἀλάζων ἔπαινος ἀλλὰ δικαιότατός τε καὶ ἀληθέστοτος, τὴν γὰρ 
la f na “ 
πόλιν ταύτην ἀφανισθεῖσαν ὑπὸ σεισμῶν τε καὶ χασμάτων 
" “ Ν / 
οὕτω TL ὠλοφύρατο πρὸς τὸν Μάρκον, ὡς TH μὲν ἄλλῃ povwdia 
\ J , AS 4, > Ν ‘ o 66 / \ 3 , 

θαμὰ ἐπιστενάξαι τὸν βασιλέα, ἐπὶ δὲ τῷ ““ ζέφυροι δὲ ἐρημὴν 
wn 9 3 \ ‘ 
katamvéovot” καὶ δάκρυα τῷ BiBAlw? ἐπιστάξαι τὸν βασιλέα, 
, os ? y nw nw > ͵ 2 4 Q 
ξυνοικίαν τε τῇ πόλει ἐκ τῶν τοῦ ᾿Αριστείδου ἐνδοσίμων " 
νεῦσαι ἐτύγχανε δὲ καὶ ξυγγεγονὼς ἤδη τῷ Μάρκῳ ὁ ἀρισ- 
τείδης ἐν Ιωνίᾳ, ὡς γὰρ τοῦ “Eqectou Δαμιανοῦ ἤκουον, 
3 , N ς > , ” a , , ¢ , \ 
ἐπεδήμει μὲν ὁ αὐτοκράτωρ ἤδη τῇ Σμύρνῃ τρίτην ἡμέραν, τὸν 
Α ’ \ 3 
δὲ ᾿Αριστείδην οὔπω γιγνώσκων ἤρετο τοὺς Κυντιλίους μὴ ev 
~ “ 2 / eof , > nan ¢ > A y 
τῷ τῶν ἀσπαζομένων ὁμίλῳ παρεωραμένος αὐτῷ ὁ ἀνὴρ etn, 


- 


nanan tt Mec πος πο[ὁὃιψΨ..».-.-ὖὦὖ΄ὺ}ἔἜ -. eee - mee κων neem mk pee mh ge ga a 


1 Should be defuisse or merutsse. 

2 We have the letter, addressel to Marcus and Commodus, 
in the works of Aristules (Jebb, § 209). Its date would be 
177-180. 


® Lit. fo the tune set by Aristides. 


372 


THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


deserved, Caligula had earned his death, Otho and Vetellurs 
ought never lo have reigned. Has opinion of Galba was 
similar, for he remarked that ἦν an Hmperor avarice! ies 
the most hateful of faults, In a word. rebels had never 
heen able to ovcreome either Augustus or Trajan or Hadrian 
or his own futher, for many as they were. they had been 
crushed against the wish οἱ. without the knowledge of the 
reigning Hinperor. Antoninus himself, however, besought 
the Senate nol fo proceed with severity against accoin- 
plices in the rebellion, asking at the same time that no 
Senator should in his γόνα be punished with death; and 
this won for him the love of all. 


(16) 


It is no Hatterer’s praise but the truest and most just 
to call Aristides the founder of Smyrna. Fox he made so 
moving a lament to Marcus over the utter destruction of 
this city by earthquakes and openings in the ground, that 
over the rest of the inournful tale the Emperor sighed 
repeatedly, but at the ‘‘ breezes blowing over a city of 
desolation’ he even let tears fall upon the writing, and 
granted the restoration of the city in accordance with the 
suggestions of Aristides. It chanced also that Aristides 
had already made the acquaintance of Marcus in Tonia, 
for when they were attending the lectures of the Athenian 
Damianus, the Empeioi who had already been three days 
in Smyrna, not yet knowing Aristides personally, re- 
quested the Quimtilu* to see that the man should not be 
passed over unnoticed in the imperial levee. They said 


...----«--....ς......ὕ...... .-..-.ΦΚ....-..... . ......ὕ..........͵.....-.-. ΄...ο. . ... 


1 en, Capit. xxix. 5: Mihi] mayis et tamutt et deprecatus 
est quam uvaritive famam de qua 86. multis epistulis purqat. 
Dio, after speakmg of his hberality and public hbenefactions, 
says (71. 32, §3): ἀφ᾽ οὗπερ καὶ νῦν θαυμάζω τῶν αἰτιωμένων 
αὐτὸν ὡς οὐ μεγαλόφρονα γενόμενον. 

2 Two brothers, tamed for their character, abihty, and 
fraternal affection. They exercised conjomtly the governo - 
ship of Achaia, and later a military command in Pannoma 
They also shared an unjust death at the hands of Commodus. 


373 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


οἱ δὲ οὐδὲ αὐτοὶ ἔφασαν ἑωρακέναι αὐτόν, οὗ yap παρεῖναι 
«ἂν τὸ μὴ οὐ ξυστῆσαι, καὶ ἀφίκοντο τῆς ὑστεραίας τὸν 
᾿Αριστείδην ἄμφω δορυφοροῦντες, προσειπὼν δὲ αὐτὸν ὁ avro- 
κράτωρ “ διὰ τί σε ᾿ ἔφη “βραδέως εἴδομεν; καὶ ὁ ᾿Δριστείδης 
“ἐθεώρημα," ἔφη, ““ ὦ βασιλεῦ, ἠσχολεῖ, γνωμὴ δὲ θεωροῦσα 
μὴ ἀποκρεμαννύσθω οὗ ζητεῖ. ὑπερησθεὶς δὲ ὁ αὐτοκράτωρ 
τῷ ἤθει τἀνδρὸς ὡς ἁπλοϊκωτάτῳ τε καὶ σχολικωτάτῳ “ὁ πότε" 
ἔφη ““ἀκροάσομαί σου; καὶ ὁ ᾿Αριστείδης “τήμερον " εἶπεν 
ἐἐ πρόβαλε καὶ αὔριον ἀκροῷ: οὐ γὰρ ἐσμὲν τῶν ἐμούντων ἀλλὰ 
τῶν ἀκριβούντων. ἐξέστω δέ, ὦ βασιλεῦ, καὶ τοὺς γνωρίμους 
παρεῖναι τῇ ἀκροάσει.᾽᾽ “ ἐξέστω," ἦ δ᾽ 6 Μάρκος, ‘* δημοτι- 
κὸν yap.” εἰπόντος δὲ τοῦ ᾿Αριστείδου, ““ διδόσθω δὲ αὐτοῖς, 
ὦ βασιλεῦ, καὶ βοᾶν καὶ κροτεῖν, ὅποσον δύνανται, μειδιάσας 
ὁ αὐτοκράτωρ “τοῦτο ἔφη ‘‘ ἐπὶ σοὶ κεῖται ᾽" 


(17) Dio, 71. 82,81 = Fragm. Dind. v. p. 207. 

Ἐλθὼν δὲ és τὴν Ῥώμην καὶ πρὸς τὸν δῆμον διαλεγόμενος, 
ἐπειδὴ μεταξὺ λέγοντος αὑτοῦ τά τε ἄλλα καὶ ὅτι πολλοῖς 
ψ» > Ν > > / ςς 3 ro» ‘ “~ Q 
ἔτεσιν ἀποδεδημηκὼς ἦν, ἀνεβόησαν ‘‘dxTw,” καὶ τοῦτο Kal 
ταῖς χερσίν, ἵνα δὴ καὶ χρυσοὺς τοσούτους ἐς τὸ δεῖπνον 
λάβωσι, προσενεδείξαντο, διεμειδίασε καὶ ἔφη καὶ αὐτὸς 
“( ὀκτώ, καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα ἀνὰ διακοσίας δραχμὰς αὐτοῖς κατ- 


“ ω 2 / *» ἢ 
ένειμεν, ὅσον οὔπω πρότερον εἰλήφεσαν. 


(18) Dio, 71. 33, § 2. 
‘O δὲ Μάρκος καὶ χρήματα ex τοῦ δημοσίου " ἤτησε τὴν 
\ 3 ed \ ὦν 24 nm ~ ~ 2 , > ? 
βουλὴν οὐχ ὅτι μὴ ἔκειντο ἐπὶ τῇ τοῦ κρατοῦντος ἐξουσίᾳ, ἀλλ 
1 The congiarium was originally a distribution of food by 
measure. The largess to soldiers was called doncfivwim., 
2 2.6. the aerarxum. The Emperor’s privy purse was called 
fiscus, 


374 


THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


they had uct seen him themselves, for they would not 
have failed to mtroduce him; and on the next. day they 
hoth arrived acting as body-guard to Aristides, and the 
Emperor addressing him said, Wy have you been so slow 
in bettriy me see you? And Aristides said, ‘A professional 
problem, O King, occupied me, and the mind, when so 
engaged, must not be detached from the prosecution of its 
enquiry.” The Emperor, charmed by the man’s character, 
his extreme naiveté and studiousness, said, Then shell [ 
hear you? And Austides rephed, “Suggest a subject 
to-day and hear me to-morrow ; for ἃ am not of those 
who ‘throw up’ what is m their minds hut of those who 
speak with precision. But grant, O King, that my pupils 
also may be present at the hearmg.” Certainly, said 
Marcus, they may, for vt is free to all. And on Aristides 
saying, ‘Pernt them, Ὁ King, to cheer and applaud as 
loud as they can,” the Emperor smiling said, That depeiuls 
on yorurself. 


(17) 


On his return to Rome, when, im addressing the people, 
he mentioned among other thmes that he had been 
absent inany years, they shouted “ Hight,” ! and signitied 
this besides with their fingers, of course that they might get 
so many pieces of gold for a congiarimn ‘The Emperor 
smiled, and himself said, Yes, eiyhl, and afterwards dis- 
tributed 200 drachmas? apiece, a larger sum than they 
had ever received before. 


(18) 


Marcus even begyed of the Senate money from the 
public treasury, not that it was not in the ruler’s 


———— - =- Se nmnee ταὶ ὦ. τὸ — --- “πα -- 55. ----ο΄.ὔβ.ὄ..-.ὄ..,.... .. ὌοὌοὺὕὺὕὺὕ................... 


1: From 169 to 176 4.p. 
Seven or eight pounds, the denarus aureus being 
= 25 silver denarn, 


375 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


f “ , - - a“ f 

ὅτι ὁ Μάρκος πάντα τῆς βουλῆς καὶ τοῦ δήμου καὶ αὐτὰ καὶ 
} 9, > ¢ ~ “ 

τἄλλα ἔλεγεν εἶναι: “ἡμεῖς yap,” ἔφη πρὸς τὴν βουλὴν 
, be.” aX ὦ “ ! ν 3 “ 

λέγων,1 ‘otras οὐδὲν ἴδιον ἔχομεν ὥστε καὶ ἐν τῇ ὑμετέρᾳ 
3 5 ~ 

οἰκίᾳ oikovpev.” 


(19) Philostratus, Vit. Soph. i. 9, p. 240 AKuys. 


Aovkiov τούτου κἀκεῖνο θαυμάσιον. ἐσπούδαζε μὲν 6 αὐτο- 
7 ΄ 
κράτωρ Μάρκος περὶ Σέξτον τὸν ἐκ Βοιωτίας φιλόσοφον, 
, > A δ “- > Ν , , 
θαμίζων αὐτῷ καὶ φοιτῶν ἐπὶ θύρας, ἄρτι δὲ ἥκων ἐς τὴν 
ξ ~ 
Ῥώμην ὁ Δούκιος ἤρετο τὸν αὐτοκράτορα mpotdvra, ποῖ βαδίζοι 


2} 
“ἐ καλὸν ᾿ ἔφῃ “Kai γηράσκοντι τὸ 


e/ 
καὶ ἐφ᾽ ὃ τι, Kal ὁ Μάρκος 
, > 
μανθάνειν" εἶμι δὴ πρὸς Σέξτον τὸν φιλόσοφον μαθησόμενος, 
ay > 2) \ ς ΄ 2 1 \ cal 3 \ ? , 
ἃ οὔπω οἶδα. καὶ ὁ Λούκιος ἐξάρας τὴν χεῖρα ἐς τὸν οὐρανόν, 
> -~ > € 

“Ὦ Zev,” ἔφη, “ ὁ Ῥωμαίων βασιλεὺς γηράσκων ἤδη δέλτον 
3 ~ 

ἐξαψάμενος és διδασκάλου φοιτᾷ, ὁ δὲ ἐμὸς βασιλεὺς ᾿Αλέξαν- 


6) 


ὃ δύ Ν , 30» >? θ 93 
pos Ovo Kat TPLaAKOVTA ἐτῶν ATE aveyv, “ 


(20) Capit. xxvirt. 


Cum aegrotare coepisset, filium® advocavit atyue ab 
eo primum petiit ut belli reliqguias non contemnevet, ne 


---..... ... tt -----.......Ψ.ὥὨὃὃΦ........ὕ..-᾽΄ὺ..... .----.................................-...ς...... .ν......-..-.-ὄ...--.-.... ........... 


1 The date would be in 178, just before the Emperor’s last 
departure for the war. 

2 For this anecdote cp. Dio, 71.1, § 2: λέγεται καὶ avro- 
κράτωρ ἂν μὴ αἰδεῖσθαι ἐς διδασκάλου φοιτᾶν, ἀλλὰ Kal Σέξτῳ 
προσιέναι τῷ ἐκ Βοιωτῶν φιλοσόφῳ καὶ ἐς ἀκρόασιν τῶν ῥητορικῶν 
Ἑρμογένους λόγων μὴ ὀκνῆσαι παραγενέσθαι. The date 1s most 
likely 177-8, before the last departure to the war. At this 
time Marcus was engaged himself m giving lectures on 
philosophy. See Aur. Victor, De Caes. xvi. 93 cp. Vule. 
xallicanus, Vit. Cassi, wi. 7. 

ὁ His son Commodus, now 19 years old. He was perhaps 
more weak than vicious As a matter of fact Pompeianus 
and the other amico of Marcus persuaded Conmodus to 
remain for six months, 


376 


THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


power to demand it, but because Marcus said that every- 
thing, both money and all else, belonuell to the Senate 
and the people ; for He, he said, speaking to the Senate 
so far from heaving anything of ow own, even lire in a 
house thas is yours! 


(19) 

Of this Lucius? another surprising story is told. The 
Emperor Marcus was an eager disciple of Sextus the 
Boeotian philosopher,’ being often in his company and 
frequenting his house. Lucius, who had just come to 
Rome, asked the Emperor, whom he met on his way, 
where he was volng to and on what errand, and Marcus 
answered, Jt as yood eren for an old man to ἴσαν; 
Laan now on my way to Sevtus the philosopher to learn 
what £ do not yet hiuow. And Lucius, raising his hand 
to heaven, said, “Ὁ Zeus, the king of the Romans in his 
old age takes up his tablets and goes te school. But my 
king “Alexander died before he was thirty-two.” 


(20) 


When he began to sicken, he sent for his sun, and at 
first besonght him noi to neglect the relics of the war,” 





1 The Emperor, if he said these words, can hardly be 
acquitted of some affectation, as he had a very large fortune 
in his own right, inherited from his mother and also through 
Faustina. 2 A philosopher friend of Herodes Atticus. 

3 Sextus was grandson of Plutarch and a teacher of 
Marcus; see Capit. in. 2, and Marcus himself (i. 9 and note), 
trom which we see what he learnt ‘in lis old age.” He also 
“*shewed off” his philosophy before Sextus; see Themistius, 
Orat. xi 145d. 

+ In this he was in the good company of our own great 
Alfred. cp. also Seneca, Hp. 76: tamdiu discendum est, 
quamdiu nescias ; Solon, Fraym. 8 Bergk, γηράσκων δ᾽ αἰεὶ 
πολλὰ διδασκόμενος. 

5 The parallel with our Edward IT. is very close. 


377 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


videretur rem publicam prodere. Et cum fils οὶ 
respondisset cupere sc primum sanitatem, ut vellet per- 
imisit petens tamen ut exspectaret paucos dies, haud 
sniul proficisceretur. Deinde abstinmt victu, potuque 
morl cupiens auxityue morbuin. Sexta die vocatis 
amicis et ridens res humanas, mortem autem contemnens 
ad amicos dixit, ‘Quid de me fletis et non magis de 
pestilentia et communi morte cogitatis?”” Kt cum ili 
vellent recedere, ingemiscens ait, “‘Si iam me dimit- 
titis, vale vobis dico vos praecedens.” Et cum ab eo 
quaereretur, cui filum commendaret, ille respondit . 
‘‘ Vohis, si dignus fuerit, et dis immortalibus.” Septimo 
die gravatus est et solum filium admisit. Quem statim 
dimisit, ne m eum morbus transiret. Dimisso filio caput 
operuit quasi volens dormire sed nocte animam ciHlavit. 


(215) Dio Fragm. Dind. «. ». 206. 
Ἔνόσησε σφόδρα ὁ Μάρκος, ὥστε ὀλίγας édmidus ἐπὶ τῆς 
σωτηρίας ἔχειν" καὶ πολλάκις ἐν τῇ νόσῳ ἐπεφώνει τὸ τῆς 
τραγῳδίας ἰαμβεῖον, 


~ 3 
“τριαῦτα τλήμων πύλεμος ἐξεργάζεται. ἢ 


(21) Dio 71. 83, § 4. 


Μέλλων οὖν ἀποθνήσκειν τῷ χιλιάρχῳ τὸ σύνθημα αἰτοῦντι 
ἔφη, ‘‘ ἄπελθε πρὸς τὸν ἀνατέλλοντα, ἐγὼ γὰρ δύομαι." 


1 This quotation occurs again in Dio, 71. 22, but with a 
different application, as a sarcasm against the rise of Pertinax, 
a man of humble birth, to the consulship. 


378 


THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


lest he should seem to betray the State. But when his 
son answered that his first care was for health, he let 
him do as he would, begging him however to wait a few 
days and net take lis departure at once. Then he 
abstained from food and drmk,! wishing to die, and 
aggravated the disease. On the sixth day he called for 
his friends, and mocking earthly things, but setting 
death at naught, he said to then, Why aeep for me and 
not rather think on the pestilence and the death that awaits 
ali? Aud when they made as though to retire he said, 
sighing, {7 you mow ywe me my sine. 1 give you my 
jareuell and bead the way For you. And when 1) was 
asked of lim to whom he commended his son, he 
answered, Vo you, if he be rrurthy, and te the ΤΕ 
Gods. On the seventh d: vy he grew worse, and allowed 
only his son to be admitted, but dismussed him at once 
that he might not take the infection. After parting from 
his son he veiled his head as if he would sleep, but im the 
night he breathed his last. 


(218) 


When Marcus was se1iwusly ill, so as to have little 
hope of resovery, he would often cry out in his illness 
this verse from the tragedy, 


Such 15 war's disastvous work 2 


(21°) 
When near his death, being asked by the tiibune for 


the watchword, he said, Go to the msing sun, for I am 
sethiny. 





1 The latter is not hkely, He had long been unable to 
take solid food ; see Dio (71 6, §4), who says positively that 
he was poisoned by order of Commodus Others say he died 
of the pestilence. 

2 Pius in the delirium of his last fever nihil alrud quam 
de re publica ef de regibus, qiabus irascebatiur, locutus ese 
(Capit. Κι, Pu, xn. 8). Napoleon’s last words were (ile 
Varmee. 


379 


NOTE ON THE ATTITUDE OF MARCUS 
TOWARDS THE CHRISTIANS 


WITH 


HIS EDICT ADDRESSED TO THE COMMON 
ASSEMBLY OF ASIA 


Mareus and the Christians. 
G. 6, 11. 16, vil. 68, vin. 48. 51, x1. 3) 


Novtuine has done the good name of Marcus so much 
hari as his supposed uncompromising attitude towards 
the Christians, and in this connexion great emphasis has 
been laid upon a passage in the present book where the 
Christians, according to our accepted text, are mentioned. 
It will be worth while to examine this and certain other 
passages in the book and see if they throw any light on 
Marcus’ real sentiments towards the Christians. 

Taking xi. 3 first, we note that παράταξις, which is per- 
sistently translated obstonacy to bring it into line with 
Pliny’s abstinativ, does not mean obstinacy at all, but 
opposition.! This is clear from the use of the word and 
105 verb elsewhere by Marcus. In 111, 3 it 1s used im its 

rimary sense of armies opposite one another on the 
field of battle. The only passage where the verb occurs 
(viii. 48) 1s very instructive. ‘‘Remember,”’ he says, 
‘that the ruling Reason shows itself unconquerable 
when, concentrated in itself, 1t is content with itself, so 








1 Since this was written I find that M. A. P. Lemercier 
(Les Pensées de Marc-Aureéle, Introd. p. vin. note 2) quotes 
with approval E,. Havet’s similar interpretation. Suidas 
glosses παράταξις with πόλεμος ἐμπαράσκευνος. 





381 


MARCOS AURELIUS 


it do nothmy that it duth not will, even Wit refuse from 
mere unreasoning opposition (κἂν ἀλόγως παματάξηται)" 
Here the word is used m exactly the same connexion as 
in xi. 3, and by no incans im a sense entirely eondemnat- 
ory. It seems to me quite possible that the Himperor 
may have had the Chnstians in nund here as well as 
mx1.3. Conduct such as that of the Christians was pre- 
cisely what Marcus 15 never tired of recommending, viz., 
not under any compulsion to transgress the demands of 
the ruling Reason,! and if it were found impossible to 
uct up to the standard of right set by the conscience (τὸ 
ἔνδον ἱδρύμενον) owing to external causes, then to depart 
cheerfully from life. It appears to me that Marcus in 
both these passages is really approving of the resistance. 

Again the actual mention of the Christians here re- 
quires to be considered. The word itself was taboo with 
the pagan stylists as a barbarisin. Even when they are 
apparently alluding to Christians, such writers as Eyic- 
tetus, Dio Chrysostom, Plutarch, Aristides, Apulezus, 
Dio Cassius, Philostratus, do not use the temn —inuch 
as an Arnold or a Pater would hesitate to use the word 
‘“Salvationist ” We do not find it in Fronto’s extant 
works nor Galen’s. Lucian, however, employed it in the 
Alexander and the Peregiius, uf which some deny) these 
works are by him. Marcus would no doubt have used 
the word, as Trajan, Pliny and Hadrian did, in reseripts 
and official documents, but it is a question whether his 
literary purisin and the example of his favourite Hpictetus 
would have allowed him to employ it in a Greek philo- 
sophical treatise. When we look at the clause, ὡς οἱ 
Xpirtiuvol, as here inserted, we see that it is outside the 
construction, and m fact ungianinatical It is im the 
very form of a maiginal note,? and las every appear- 
ance of bemg a gloss foisted into the text But even if 
the words be omitted, Marcus may still have had the 


Li etn nen ........ ..............---.-....ς-ςΈςἘ  , ο..-.-- . .-Ξ.ὄ .ς..-. ος-.ς.. ...-- -οὕ.ὕὄὺὄὕ.Ψ........-.ς......----- . 





1 He says (vili. 41) that ‘nothing can overbear this Reason, 
not steel, nor tyrant, nor obloquy.’ 
5.1 see Lemeicier holds the same view. 


382 


NOTE ON CHRISTIANS 


Christians in umnd when he wrote the passage, which 
only condemns an eagerness to ineet death without real 
justification and without due dignity 1 

There are other expressions m this buok which seein to 
glance at a body of men who must have been often im 
Marcus’s thoughts. For instance, when he speaks (vn. 68) 
of those who ‘‘can live out their ves in the utmost 
peace of mind, ever though all the warld ery out against 
them whut they choose, and the beasts tear them limb from 
limb,” he cannot be thinking of criminals m the ordmary 
sense of the word, for it is evident that mnocent people 
are meant, and if so, what innocent people received such 
treatinent ὁ Lt is not at all nnpossible—TI think it highly 
probable--that Marcus looked upon the Christians as 
misguided enthusiasts, who had to be punished as the 
law then stood,? but whom he no more than Hadrian and 
Pius?’ wished to punish. Again (vu. 51) he quotes the 
indignant cry of whom but the Christians? They hill its, 
they cut us limb from limb, they execrate us! Addimg the 
comment: How does that prevent you from being pure, 
sane, sober, just? In yet another place (ai. 16), in words 
that point still more conclusively to the Christians, he 
acknowledges that to own the Intelligence as ruler and 
guide to what 1s a clear duty 1s found also among ‘‘ those 
who do not believe ὧν Gods, and those who will vot stund by 


------Ο-᾿.---.. 














1. This is not much more than what Clem Alex. says, 
Stromata, iv. 4. There were some egrevious cases of voluntary 
martyrdom in Spain under the Moslems (see the present 
writer’s Christianity and Islam in Spar, pp. 37 tt). See 
also the conduct of Callistus, afterwards Bishop of Rome. 
Hippolytus, fefut. Huer ix 12. Nor were plulosophers 
exempt from the reproach of dying ractations causa (see 
Diyest, xxvii. 3 6. 7). 

2 This was the view of Rusticus, his ‘domestic philo- 
sopher.’ (See Acts of Justin Martyr.) 

ὁ This 1s clear from the joint letter of Marcus and Pius to 
the Larissaeans, Thessalonicans, Athenians, and all the Greeks 
against mob-violence towards the Christians; see Melito in 
dusebius, iv. 26, § 10). 


383 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


their country, and those who do their (evil) work behind 
closed doors” Now all these three were the stock charges 
against Christians, and who can doubt they are hinted at 
here? Lastly there is the reference to exorcism (i. 6),! in 
which Marcus says that Diognetus taught him to dis- 
believe. 

Asa matter of fact, Marcus has been condemned as a 
persecutor of the Christians on purely circumstantial and 
quite insufficient grounds. The general testimony of con- 
temporary Christian writers is against the supposition. 
So is the known character of Marcus. His distinguishing 
characteristic, in which he excelled all recorded rulers, 
was humanity. His φιλανθρωπία is mentioned by Galen, 
Dio, Philostratus, Athenagoras (twice), Melito, and Aris- 
tides (eleven times) ; and his hamanitas by the eminent 
jurist Callistratus 7 As soon could Alexander have turned 
his back in the day of battle as Marcus shown cruelty to 
his subjects, however lowly. ‘‘ Never,” says Marcus in 
the eighth book of his self-communings, ‘‘have I willingly 
injured another,” and Themistius (Orat. 15) 1ecords how, 
when penned in by his enemies in a new Caudine Forks, 
he raised his hands to Heaven and cried, ‘‘ With this hand 
wherewith I have shed no blood, I appeal to Thee and 
beseech the Giver of life.” 

He had a passion for justice, and was most scrupulous 
in his observance of law, as Papimian, the greatest of 
jurists, has told us. That he should have encouraged 
mob-violence against unoffending persons, ordered the 
torture of innocent women and boys, and violated the 
rights of citizenship in his insensate fury, is as mecon- 
ceivable as that St. Lows should have broken the Christian 
law or become a Mohammedan. ‘That some Christians 
suffered for their religion m the reign of Marcus is most 


- ».--.ὄ.οοοο-0Θ.Ρ......... .....-....ὄ ......... ο.ὕ..ὕὃ.β..-ὕ.... Ae be -Ἕ"ἷ. .ὄ.-.ς..-.. 


1 On which see note above, and cp Lucian, Philops. § 16 
(of Christ). 

2 Marcus himself in lis laws repeatedly appeals to this 
principle. Capit. says he was noted for the nuldness of his 
punishments, and see p. 369. 


384 


NOTE ON CLERISTTANS 


probable, though there is perhaps no single martyrdum at- 
tributed to this period of which the date fis certam beyouc 
caval, Phat there was in any sense a yveneral persecution 
of the Christians at this time 1s contrary to all the facts. 
‘Phere were numbers of them in Romeitself, with a Bishop 
αὖ them head. There were actually Christians in the Ein- 
peror's household and probably (ey Apollonius) in the 
Senate itself. Of all these Roman Christians we only 
hear of Justin and his six companions bemg martyred, 
one of them being a slave of the Emperor. Other 
Chistian slaves in the royal household survived him. Tf 
he wished to put down Chnistianity, why did he not 
bevin with his own palace and with Rome ?- 

So far from persecuting them, we know that as sub- 
ordinate ruler with Pius? he was responsible for the letter 
to the Greek cities forbidding outrages against the 
Christians. The letter to the Common Assembly of 
Asia, viven below, 1f authentic, emanated from him in 
conjunction with Pius or from hin alone. Its genume- 
ness in the main has been upheld by Harnack, and 1s 
certainly capable of defence. 

' Dr. Abbott has given plausible reasons for doubting the 
date of the lyons martyrdon, and some (¢.y. Havet) deny 
the authenticity of the letter in Eusebius 

~ The tamous caricature of the Christian religion found 
in the pages’ quarters m the Palatine (see Lanciani, Ancient 
Rome 122) dates from this reign 

3 Melito says distinctly cof τὰ συμπάντα διοικοῦντος αὐτῷ, 
Huseh. iv. 96. 10 (" πάντα συνδιοικοῦντοΞῚ 


385 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


᾿Αντωνίνου πρὸς TO Κοινὸν τῆς “Agias ἐπιστολὴ (περὶ τοῦ 
καθ᾿ ἡμᾶς λόγου). 
(Husebius, iv. 13=Nicephorus iii. 28; ep. Justm. 
dpol. 1. ad fin.) 
Αὐτοκράτωρ Kaioup Μάρκος Αὐρήλιος ᾿Αντωνῖνος Σεβαστὸς 
» , > \ ΄ ~ ΄ 
[Αρμένιοςἢ ἀρχιερεὺς μέγιστος, δημαρχικῆς ἐξουσίας τὸ πέμπτον 
LY ¢ fy 4 ~ ζω ~ 
καὶ τὸ δέκατον, ὕπατος τὸ τρίτον, τῷ Kowa τῆς ᾿Ασίας χαίρει».ἷ 
? ‘ 5 9 ¢ “ “ , , 
Ἐγὼ μὲν οἶδα 3 ὅτι καὶ τοῖς θεοῖς ἐπιμελές ἐστε μὴ λανθάνειν 
(Nat aman LARA cA RAAT SST ATTA CTD PRET AH AAA SAH TAC PS pps hy aaa UC PSE RTAAAEKEACHOMESA ATR 
ὃ 


\ a cad 3 
Tovs τοιούτους. πολὺ yap μᾶλλον ἐκεῖνοι κολάσαιεν ἢ ἂν Tavs 
AE AN κε 5 RAAT — ROR OO αν ἐλ. δ OO PRADO AARC RNAI ttt PE Slt tl CRI MOL BERR nga A Sm Ht, We DANA LICE Daag NA SO " 





\ , A ad A “" ἃ \ 
μὴ βουλομένους αὐτοὺς προσκυνεῖν ἢ ὑμεῖς. obs εἰς ταραχὴν 


ail Letina ca a Go ARIA a γος aC 





3 , ΄- n »” ¢ 
ἐμβάλλετε, βεβαιοῦντες τὴν γνώμην αὐτῶν ἥνπερ ἔχουσιν, ὡς 
PLA NETRA ότι EEA OETA IIE MEE pelt: TOT RBIS NONE. DACA A -α DOO Aa A SOBA AAA tC ENACT iA: ROUGH Oa EN AEE NERA AB DOSTANA NE A 
1O€ a t 2] δ᾽ “Δ Ε , ¢ ‘ \ ὃ aa 
άθεων κατηγοροῦντες ἢ εἴη δ᾽ ἂν κἀκείνοις αἱρετὸν τὸ δοκεῖν 
θεν ANA A λα LAR TO OREN SCIEN SNE SCE TEE CCAR LON IT, PEG SCO OIA IT PA SE NES AEE TOMO OBR SACRO LER LAS HORNE HORAN NARI δινεδμαμηρφαιἡερβι αι αυδαβμίαι, ον λα δ᾽ μαβκνΜνῖῃ)ς μύακηηγάτεν, 
΄ “- " “ ~ a 
κατηγορουμένοις τεθνάναι μᾶλλον ἢ ζῆν ὑπὲρ τοῦ οἰκείου θεοῦ." 
2 ARASH RRO eA A MANNA PALES ORCS ΝΟ app AA SI ΚΣ Ν᾽ CAO SPIN: ABATE All RR A DONA LPH ANSARI UCR LID 
e Ν “ , ἧς. ¢ lad , uo Ac 
ὅθεν καὶ νικῶσι, προιέμενοι τὰς ἑαυτῶν ψυχάς, ἥπερ πειθόμενοι 
® > ἴω , - a“ al 
ois ἀξιοῦτε πράττειν αὐτούς. περὶ δὲ τῶν σεισμῶν τῶν γε- 
SR enn aa aeinedanermrametemmenne etteshenineiaatimanmmenaeneemnemiiammn) 





Ἁ “ a“ μ - 
γονύτων καὶ γινομένων οὐκ ἄτοπον ὑμᾶς ὑπομνῆσαι, ἀθυμοῦντας 
Le seammmememmntanenten-bdhoenanninnsmenpeamieanutian mmm um iment zetia oanmananatpmeaeme mmm 9 pete rin pment apna time τὴ mt ela ets aioe een segnenarme an τὰ μωνηρφὰ δά ino arene ει, Ἀμκδνανμαμ ας αὶ υὐμμίθημζ ΑΕ. »ὠμκεν να ἀτός ας ἀσαρυησκακ κα, αν και δε ες ες ας δ α μια. ΚῊν μάκαρ. 


μὲν ὅταν περ ὦσι, παραβάλλοντας de® τὰ ἡμέτερα πρὸς τὰ 


1 The version in dustin αὖ the end of «tf μοί. 1. has the fol- 
lowmye headiny Αὐτὸς Kato. Tiros Αἴλιος “Adpiavds ᾽Ἄντων. 
SeP εὐσεβής, ἀρχ. μέγ, δημαρ. εξ, ὑπατος τὸ TO, πατὴρ 
πατρίδηυς τὸ κα΄ κτλ. Vhe dates are out of place and oli- 
viously absurd; πὸ ΞΞ 8. and κα΄ τῶ} Altered to κδ' and δ' 
respectively and placed atter ἐξουσίας and ὕπατος they would 


wv 


give the date [6]. “ guny Justin. 

ὁ ἐκείνους κολάσοιεν, εἴπερ δύναιντο J. 

Ἐ οἷς ταραχὴν ἐμβ., καὶ THY.... κατηγορεῖτε -“καὶ ἕτερά τινα 
ἐμβάλλετε, ἅτινα οὐ δυνάμεϑα ἀποδεῖξαι Ξ- J. 

2. These last seven words onntted J. 

6 οὐκ εἰκὸς ὑπομνῆσαι ὑμᾶς aO., OT. π. ὦσι, παραβάλλοντας τὰ 
Ou. wT Awd. 





a acer ..ο..ὄ....-.-.-.........--... ae 








T An unusual form for ᾿Αρμενιακός, a title not eiven till 163. 
ὁ Marcus was consul for the third tine and renewed his 


386 


NOTE ON CHRISTIANS 


Leiler of wdndonimus to the Common soenebly of 2istu 
Ce boul or rebiywi). 


The Hiperor Caesi Maicus Aniclius Antoninus .Au- 
gustus [Amuenmus?] Pontifex Maxnnus in the fiftecuth 
year of his Trmbunate, Consul for the third tinue,” to the 
Common Assembly of Asia giceting. 

Tam confident? that the Gods also look to it that such 
persons should not escape detection. For itis much more 
their concern than yours to punish those who 1efuge tu 
worship them. But you barass these inen,! and harden 
them m thei conviction, to which they hold fast, by 
accusing, them of bemg atheists. For indeed they would 
rather be thought to be accused and dhe for their own 
God than live Consequently they even come off vic- 
torious, giving up thei lives rather than comply with 
your demands. And with respect to the past ond present 
carthquakes® it 1s not amiss to 1emmd you of them, 
despoudeut as you are whenever they occur and yet for 
ever contrasting your behef and conduct with theirs. 
Tred. μοὶ. for the fifteenth time in 161, i which year he 
became emperor on 7 March and within a few days assouiated 
TLacius Verus in the empue with himself. 

“ Phe beginning of the reseript 1s apparently lest. cp. for 
the opening words the deorum aie ine dis curue of Tacitus 

* The Justin text says ‘charge them with disorder,” and 
adds ‘and bring other charges against them wlich we cannot 
prove. 

5 There were several earthquakes in Asia Minor between 
138 and 180, Rhodes, Smyrna, and Cyzicus being destroyed, 
but the dates are not accwately settled The:e was ceitainly 
one atl Smyrna about 177, but that 1s too late. There was 
one at least in the reign of Pius, and the one here mentioned 
is supposed by some to have ocenrred about 152, but I think 
it may possibly be identified with one by which Cyzicus was 
chiefly atfected ; see Fronto, Ad Ant. 2 (A.v. 162). 





207 
cc 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


3 Ν ΕᾺ γ f 
ἐκείνων. οἱ μὲν οὖν εὐπαρρηυιαστότεροι γίνονται πρὸς τὼν 


Fal ͵ ΝΥ a ΜΝ \ ΄, ᾿ / 748 > Peeks ἐν a 
εὖν, ὑμεῖς Se+ raya πάντα τὸν χρόνον καθ᾽ ὃν ἀγνοεῖν δυκεῖτε, 
“ nw ΄“ > “ “ “ my 
τῶν τε θεῶν (καὶ) τῶν ἄλλων ἀμελεῖτε, καὶ τῆς θρησκείας τῆς 
πᾳ... «σ΄ ΄΄“΄ᾷ΄“ᾳ 0“ “00 «τ΄ aeons dee ian ῇ΄“΄““«ᾳ ͵΄΄΄««΄“΄΄“΄΄““ἰὐ΄΄  ΝΝ 
\ Ἁ ? , a ἈΝ 4 r \ 7 
περὶ τὸν ἀθάνατον, ὃν δὴ τοὺς Χριστιανοὺς θρησκεύοντας 
i mpemetibimgmnetieme ns δον οὐδο  ονλῦν σαν ee 


ω 9 
ἐλαύνετε Kai διώκετε ἕως θανάτου". 








ς \ 4 a , »” ‘ λ V3 ζω Ν “ Σ , 
Ὑπὲρ δὲ τῶν τοιούτων, ἤδη καὶ πολλοὶ " τῶν περὶ τῆς ἐπαρχίας 
ata φασιν, he CRS EN YEN SLA FEDER A SS ty OE eM NG SACS A SP ER PL NA tN PRET PISA ay RETA ATS REA ASS LA YO HI cb RA ON ema ONE 

ς ἢ Ν ~ ΄ coon + , Ων ν 5 ΄ 
ἡγεμόνων καὶ τῷ θειυοτάτῳ ἡμῶν ἔγραψαν πατρί οἷς καὶ ἀντέ- 
ΓΘ neta remnants anna cesar tars ance ne atte a παναυεσδηιμεεοσσε ιοαοσ αν θα ο ΟΣ 
δὲ 2 ἂν “ 2 Ν , ‘ Ν 4 

ypawe μηδὲν ἐνοχλεῖν τοῖς τοιούτοις, εἰ μὴ φαίνοιντο τι περὶ 
Ἢ “- ς , ς , > a ™ Α > \ 4 \ 
τὴν τῶν “Ῥωμαίων ἡγεμονίαν ἐγχειροῦντες. καὶ ἐμοὶ δὲ περὶ 
iat RA ns atl used APO ABLE Rl SUA adn adc EW ami aes an AR οὐ θεῷ και εκ εν tae ADA pL tS aA nen DS Ratna nya ed 

“ ,ὔ Ν > ἢ ΩΣ \ \ 2 a 

τῶν τοιούτων πολλοὶ ἐσήμαναν, οἷς δὴ καὶ ἀντέγραψα κατα- 
depen με κέρᾳ base pent κά NC al HC NAM AD Bie BR dt Bat cE RAE EN VE ae ρει δι IE aR ab i ttt CARY AE Re ARSE ET tA Al Rl Nh RAL Rh pe aba mE NN RD νέας 
κολουθῶν τῇ τοῦ πατρὸς γνώμῃ. εἰ δέ τις ἐπιμένοι τινὰ τῶν 


4 Ἵ é ς \ “ "4 “~ 
τοιούτων εἰς πράγματα φέρων ws δὴ τοιοῦτον." ἐκεῖνος ὁ κατα- 
aM a SER. SANA a SEATS RECT ABR ASL κοί. αι. ς ON BB HL AIO RN Hla tee Rh RNP abun ENEMA Sty Ubi ht ine aA ORLA ogee Ma tag A | 





, > 7 “ 2 , Ἀ ry ΄ 
φερόμενος ἀπολελύσθω τοῦ ἐγκλήματος καὶ ἐὰν φαίνηται 
ce reer aimee accede ehh cae με, ιλβαραιαιθασμμα απο κασι ααειραιιαι ψήοναρεθίεϑῃ μήκη. amram ρα αῃ ῥεημωςἀμμη εακεα ας νρρωμερενφικῆρρὶ διε ἀκόνενδνωντωμῆς καιρννιρῳυμακδέιδ καινοτμεβκιλη ἰῷ, ᾧ echiidentmmaimimmaeermiieesamimarmmdana camel 


“ af ς Ν ΄ af " δι OG 
τοιοῦτος ὦν, ὁ δὲ καταφέρων ἔνοχος ἔσται δίκης. 
fA Ba Ne PRE aT Ca eR GAR PEAS ARANDA BD AA ESAS HERRERA SD ai NIA χὰ μα, AS ABA BRI IN BG λει, δὰ. Kec OPS OR 
, ? ? ΄ 2 ~ “ μὴν > , 
προετέθη ἐν ᾿Εφέσῳ ἐν τῷ Kowa τῆς ᾿Ασίας, 


' Here Harnack supphes ὅτι. 

2 Ort εὐπαρ. ὑμῶν γίν. τὸν πρὸς θεύν καὶ ὑμεῖς μὲν ἀγν 
οκεῖτε παρ᾽ ἐκεῖνον τ. Xp. τοὺς θεούς, καὶ τῶν ἱερῶν au , θρησκ 
é τὴν π. τὸν θεὸν οὐκ ἐπίστασθε. ὅθεν καὶ τοὺς θρησπκεύονταϑ 
ζήλωσατε καὶ διώκ. ἕως θ. J. 

δ καὶ ἄλλοι τινὲς Without ἤδη J. ὁ ἐπὶ J. 

> εἰ δέ τις ἔχει πρός τινα τῶν τοι. πράγμα καταφέρειν J 

υ The parts underlined are those which Harnack (7'earte 
und Ontersuch. 2. Gesch. der Alt-Christ. Liter. xiii.) con- 
siders portions of the genuine edict. Eusebius places it 
under the reign of Pius, though he gives the superseription 
as above. The version in Justin seems to be an ‘“‘ improved ἢ 
form of the text, making it clearer and more emphatic 
It is not known whether the rescript was origimally in Greek 
or Latin, but almost certainly it was m the former 


Ms OF ΟἽ 


NOTE ON CHRISTIANS 


They mdced show the imore outspoken confidence im 
ther God, while you during the whole time of your 
apparent ignorance both nexlect all the other Gods and 
the worship of the Ever-living One,! whose worsluppers, 
the aun you in fact harass and persecute to the 
death. 


And on behalf of such persons many Governors also of 
provinces have before now both written to our deitied 
father, whose answer in fact was not to molest such 
persons uuless they were shewn to be making seme 
attempt in respect to the Roman Government,? and to 
me also many” have given information about such men, 
to whom indeed Τὸ also rephed in accordance with iy 
father’s view. And if any one petsist in bringing any 
such person wto trouble for being what he is, let hin, 
against whom the charge ts brought, be acquitted even if 
the charge be made out, but let him who brings the 
charge be called to acceunt.! 


Published at Ephesus in the Common Assembly of 
Asia. 


ως see ππτο-π - ὦ = ---- - ὦ. τ-΄- ....... .. Ὁ ....- ὲ .. .,,... .. .-.... 


1: Harnack thinks Δία should be supphed and for the fol- 
lowing five words substitutes ἐκεῖνος δέ, 

ὁ If this edict is by Pius, we should expect to find some 
such injunction m his τ" deified father” Hadrian’s edict about 
the Christians (see Huseh iv. 9), but there is none. On the 
other hand it may have been in the edict of Pius ** to all the 
Greeks ? mentioned by Melito (Huseb. rv. 10). 

ὁ ΙΝ is the one word im the document which does not 
seem consistent with the date 16], when Marcus had only 
just become emperor. 

+ 'Phis portion of the edict seems too favourable to the 
Christians for even Marcus to have promulgated, 


INDEXES 


IL—INDEX OF 


MATTERS 


References are te Book and Section of the Thoughts? and tou payes in lhe 
rest of the book 


Acuténtss (ἀμιμυτῆης), Vo 3, VE 417 

Aim, or ob jective, OL coal m jite 
(σκοπὺς Go), 1 163 Vill. 1 τ; 
X. 37, XH 20, 24 

Aimlessness πὶ ὅς 7, 16,17, ul 4, 
δ 2, Ave ὃ 

Amphitheatse, aud 
46, X.8, XIL. 9 

Analysis of ‘things, essential, U1. 11, 
ΝΊ. ὦ, SIL 29, ὙΠῚ a, χὶ ἃ, 
ΧΙ, 10, 18 

Anger, 1. 9. $33 ἢ. 1, lu, τὸς at 
what happens, VIL 387 WEEE ET 
XI. 18, $$ 3, 8, 10 

Apathy (amd#sva) A Stores, AL is 

103 ep. ἀταραξι 

Architect, Vr ὁδ 

Arethas, a Cappadoctan bishop 
about 900 A.D ; quoter Marcus, 
on Luctan, Pease 20 (=Vi. 47 
Memamos); De Salt. 63, Δημήτριοι' 
Tor Wum«ov (τ 25 Δημήτριος 
. UAdatuviaus); Lio Linagy. L VIL. 

» Πάνθεια), ov Dio Chrysostom, 
Ori. xx. ὃ (= 5 εἰς COUTOP ἀναὰ- 
χωρεῖν)» Oe ee 15 {-ἢς ὁ 
πάντα «Κεῖθον pet) 
ae 370, quoted on thyleat, 
etc. 

Art, AI 40, cherish thine own, 
IV. 313 loveot, V 1,823 object οἱ, 
VE 16, lower than Nature, AL. 10 

Astoluehment at what happens 15 
ridiculous, Vr 15, ΧΗ. 1,8 2. 10 

Astrologers (Chaldaeans), Il 28, 
Iv. 48 

Attraction o1 afhuity (συμπάθεια), 
IV. 27, V. 2635 OX. ἢ, δὼ 


WARC. AUREL. 


>? 


games, 1.53 VI. 


Atoms or Got ν΄. ὁ, δ), Vile at’ 
VI 17, IX. 28, ΓΝ 
5 1 

Avatie, 375 

Avoidance notaversion VE 20 

Axioms, principles, postulates, 
Maxis (doymara), IV. 16, VI. 
Vit 1, [45 mx. 29; holy, X. 9, 


Parbauan audiliares, 373 

Bussaeus Lotus, praef praet , 307 

Bathing, I. 16,§ 73; vor 24 

“Bear and Torbear” (arcyou 
amre\ov), ¥ 33; cp. IV. ὃς ὃ 2 (1οῖ- 
bearance a pat of justice) 
Vint. 59 

Beautitul, the, τι. 1 

Beauty in natural things, U. I, 
in youth, WI 2, ἃ 2 

benetianus, see Yenuetianus 

Black character, a, IV 18, Js 

Blessmes, thankfulness tor, VU. 27 

Hoar, wud, ut. 2, αὶ L, x. 10 

Body, vessel or sheath of soul, 
ἩΠ ὁ, 8. Aas Ge 2 SR ΙΧ δ: Χοὸδ 
XU 1. 2,353 the inferlot partuer, 
x1 19 

Bodies of dead, how 100m tor, Iv 2] 

Bodily desires, vit 55, ἃ 2, ete 

Books, U. 2, 33 reading or writing 
Οἵ, 1 73; Τῇ. 14, ΝΠ. ὃ, ΧΙ 0 

Bread, simile iron), ir. 2, ὃ 1 

Bieath (see πυιῦμα, πιευμάτιον), Ik o* 
VIIL 25, ὅθ; ΧΙ. ὁ; ΧΗ, 20 

Breathing through the artertea 
(διαπντισθαι), an ancient medical 
notion, IF 1, Vi. 16 


INDEX OF MATTERS 


Brigandage, X 10; XI. 18,§ 7 
Burials in bodies ot animals, 1. 21 


§ 2 


Cassius, Avidius, 348 ff., 371 

τ Caesarification,” VI. 30 

Cause (αἰτία, αἰτιον, τὸ aitraécs), the 
Final, Formal, or Efficient, v. 8 ; 
vIn. 10; Ix 98, 37; in man, VOI. 7; 
Ix. 31; x, 26; in God or Nature, 
ΙΧ. 1, 29 

Causal and material, Iv. 21, §3;3 
v.13; vit. 29; vit. 11, IX. 25, 
97; ΧΙ. 10, 18, 29 

Causation, ΧΙ. 8 

Chance, 1. 17 ad. fin.; Τὰ 3,173 ΤΙ. 
1.1: TX. 28 ; ΧΙ, 14, Ω 

Change, II 73 IV. ΓΝ 86; VI. 36; 
vil. 18, 28, 253 Vill. 6; Ix. 19, 
28 ; x. η, $4, one 18; XII. 21; 
cycles of, Ὗ. 13: X. 7, 82; XI. ie 
δ 23; of mind, IV. 12; vit. 10, 16 

hans (see Medley), Iv. 27; Vi. 10, 
x 89, xm 14 


Character, the perfect, vi 69; 
portrayed, I 16; vi. 30, αὶ 2; 
cp 1. 15 


Charity (see JT.ove of neighbour), 
Tl 13; VI. 47, IX. 42; x. δ, 2; 
XI 1 

Cheerfulness, Ι. 15, 16, 83. τπ. ὃ; 


Children, vir 41+, ving 495 IX. 40, 
X 34,353 ΧΙ 347, loss of, 1 ὃ 
nole , Ulness of, VIL 49; safety of, 
X. 35; Marcus’ own, I. 17, § 43 
his fondness tor, I. 13 

Christians, I. 6, ἼἼΠ. 10, Vil 68, 
VIII. 48,51, §2; xr ὃ (here only 
mentioned and this probably a 
gloss). See pp. 381 ff. 

Circus, 1, 5, X. 38 

Cities destroyed by natural disas- 
ters, Iv. 48; pp. 373, 387 

Coarseness (ut Stowus, nulla habet 
tacenda), V. 12, 283 VI. 13, VIII. 
21 (MS); x. 19 

Colloquialism, in the mason’s trade, 
Vv. 8 § 1; a “* visitation from 
Heaven,” v 8,§ 1; loves = 15s 
wont, X. 21; use of pémBos, τ. 17 
‘ommodus, 351 ff. 

Concilum οἱ Tamperor, 362 

Concubine (of Verus οἱ Hadzian), 
I 17,§ 2; of Lucius Verus, VIII. 37 


394 


Conditional action, IV. 1; v. 20: 
vi. 50 

Congiarla, I. 16,§7, pp. 365, 375 

Contentment, ΤΠ. 4, Ἐ4, 125 Iv. 25; 
v. 8, § 2, 37 vit. 54, 57; VII. 
46; X. 1,6, §2; 11, 28 : ΧΙ, 13, 20, 
82. xi. 1,3 

Cosmépolitanism, a Stoic doctrine, 
see World-city 

Country retreats, Iv.3; xX 1, x11.2 

Court elaquette, 4 16, ’g 2 

Court life, 1. 17, § 2: Υ. 3, V. 16 
VI. 12, VIII. Q 

Craze or hobby, v. 1; xm. 27 

Customs’ officer, I. 17, 88 

sycles, see Regeneration 


Daemon (866 δαίμων, and Genius.) 

Dancing, v.13 VII 61: <i. ὃ 

Death, II. 2, beg Iir. 3, a3 lv 5, 6, 
32, 48, 50; ν΄ 33 , VI. 2, 28, 16; 
Vit 32; VI 25, $1, 583 1Χ 
91; xX 13, 29; no evil, Xu. 
233; to be despised, XII 31, 353 
a process of Nature, I. 123 
ix. 3, x 36, § 2; our death 
desired, x. 36; the leveller, VI. 
2.4. a λύσις τῶν στοιχείων, I. 17 

Dead, generations of the, VI. 47 

Dependence of things on one an- 
other, Vv. 16, 30 

Destiny, II. 6,8, 11, § 35 Iv. 26, 34; 
Vv 8. 24: xu 14 

Dialectics, i 17, §8, Vil. 673 VII 
13 

Dio Chrysostom, 866 Arethas ; {10 
Cassius, see Notes 1.5,6,7, Τὰ 12, 
IV 26, VIE 7, IX i δῶν ke Gs 
ΧΙ. 21 

Discontent, murmuring, rebellion 
against our lot, W 2, 3, 13,16; 
Iv 8,52, VI 40, VIL. Gi; 1X. 37; 
ΧχΧ. ἃς KI 20 

Dispersion, Vi 4, 103; VII. 32, 50; 
vin. 25, 1X 39, x 7,823 x1. 3 

Dissolution, II 17 ad fin. , IV. 91: 
VU. 503 IX 823; X. 73 XI 20: 
XI. 36 

Divine, the, in man, see God 

Doctors, ΤΙ. 3, 13 Iv. 48; 
VI. 35, 553 ὙΠ]. 15; Aesculapius 
as prescriber, V. 8 

Dotage, Tit, 1 

Diama, the, 1. 8; Vu. 3; (x. 24 
X. 273 XI. 1, 65 XIL. 36 


INDEX OF MATTERS 


Dreams,1i 17,§8; 1x. 27 
Duty, If 1, 16 (of the Christians) ; 
VI. 2, 22, 26,3 


Earth, smaliness of, m1. 10; Iv. 3, 
§3, VII 21, XH. 32 

“ Economy ” (οἰκονομία, 

19, 51, ΧΙ, 18, ὃ 5 

Blements the, tv. 4, 46; vit. 31 : 
IX.93; X. 7. δὲ Ὁ, 3 

Emerald, Iv. 20: vir 15 

Emperor, a private person, I. 17, 
§ ὃ; fire carried before hun, 
117,83, p 367 

Enfranchisement of slaves, 360, 363 

Evil, not recognized as such, ΤΠ 1, 
13, inevitable, Iv 6; Vv. 173 and 
God, 1 11; What is evil to a 
man, ff. 113 falls on all alike, 
τι. 113 not uiterminab le, IX 35 * 
surprise at, ix 42,8 4, ele. 

Evolution, fv. 45. TX 238° 

Excerpts from books, lr 14 

Exorcism, I 

External things, cannot harm us, 
I, 11, DV ὁ ae fin, 8, 39, 49; 
vin OL, VI 1 ad fin, οἷ ἸΧ. 81: 
to be despised, VF 16,83 


q.v.), IV. 


Extinetion of soul, ¥. 33, vit 32, 
ὙΠῚ 25, IX. 33 XT 5 
Paihue, vi TL, X 123 not to be 


taken to heart, Vv. 9 

Faith, ν. 33, pp 549, 551 

Falernian wine, Vi. 13 

Fame, τι. 17, Tl LOS fv ἡ, δ 9 She 
33, V.333 VI 16, § 2 2, 18, VII 6, 
34, Vil {0 91, 37, 41, Ix 30, οἷοι 
ep, ὁδὺ 

Fate, see Destiny 

Fellowship of men (κοινωνίω, ete.), 
ust, my. 1, αὶ 8, 11}; tv. 4, ΕἼ, 
16, VI 7, 14, os 39: ΨΙΙ, Dy 19, 
δῆ, δ L, vier 12, 26,50, ΙΧ, 1, 
203, 31, "42, § 5; X. 36; XH. 20 
See also Love οἱ neighbour 

Figs, WI 2; Iv 6; vi. 14; ὙΠῚ 15, 
X. 85 XU. "16; not to be looked for 
m1 winter, XT. 33 

Fine writing, 172 {Π. ὃ 

Fire, rv. 1: ΠῚ 41. 1Χ 9: Χ. 81,33 

Wlesh, the, 2; V 26; νι. ῶ8, vu. 


oe VO. 56; IX 41"; xX. 8, 245 
, 14 
Plax. of things (see also under 


Herachtus), 0.17; Iv. 8 ad. fin. 

36:3 Υ΄ 10, § 23 Vi. 152 Vu. 19 
Forbearance, Iv 3,§2; v.33 
BOEne: i. 8; good, Iv. 49, ὃ 2; 


36, § 2 
Giends: I. 7, § 1; favours tron, 
τ, ὃ; consideration ἴοῦ, 1. 9; 


love of, I. 14; virtues of, vr. 48; 
candid, 1 13, help of, 362, 363 

Nronto, see notes, 1. 7, 8, 11, 16, ἢ 2, 
8ξ 6.7. 8: ΤΙΤ, ἐπ aes v 1, 5, 6, 
8 1 σἹ. 39, 46, VIET 22; VIII. 30, ΠῚ 


(ralen, 360 

Games, see Spectacles 

Gardeners, saying of, XI. 8 
Generation and growth, X. 26 
Genius (δαίμων), divine in man, I. 


10, 18. 17. A. ὁ. ὃ 8 ὁ,7, 12, 
OR Κ 27 ὙΠ, 45, Χ Bs 


Getting up in the moining, 1. 1; 
Vo 1: Viti; 12 

Gladiators, I. δ᾽; ΧΙ. 9 

Glory, see Fame 

Goal in life, see Aim 

God or Gods, Ι 17, ὃξ 1-55 1, 45's 
existence ‘of, 1, τὶ, ΧΗ. 98: 
priest of, Wt, Ἵ $33 and Chance, 
TE ae 2; and Atoms, VIL. 
ee 25, 39; follow God, 
ΠΙ 6. ἴω ὲ ῶ: oS, 11; i. 
27,31; do they take thought tor 
man? vr 44; Ix. 40; One, VII. 
9; art of, vir 68: in Nature, 
IX. L, lmmanent in all things, 
VIL. 9; VEO. 54, τῷ us, I. 1, 45 
Ill 8,60,8 2, XI "19; ΧΙ 1, § 2,2, 
26, walk with, Vv 27: : reverence 
¥ 33; VI. 30% "call on, Vr 24, 30, 
8 13 uuonartial, vt 703 Sun and 
all the Gods, vm 19; not power- 
less, IX 40; hLkeness with, X 8, 
§ 23 wervics of, ΠῚ 4; XI 20, 
§ 2, allows the good to pelish, 
XU. 53 reasonumg witn, XIT 5; 
do 20 wrong, XI 12; men God- 
borne, XII. 23; all from God, XII. 
26; man, fellow citizen of, X. 13 
omnipotent, 3849; judge of 
sovianty, 366 

Good, the, Vv. 15; 
us, VIE 59 

Good and evil, VI. 41 

Good man, a, 1V 10,17, 25, x. 8, 
16, 32; vocation, to be, ΧΙ. 5 


395 


fountain of, in 


INDEX OF 


Good men, perish at death, XIr. 5 
Goodness betrays itself, x1. 15 
Giowth, X. 7, § ὃ 


Handicraitsmen, zeal ot, V. 1, § 2; 
VI. 35 

Happiness, Vv. 9, 345 Vu. 17, 67; 
VU. 1, X. 33 

Harmony ot nature, VI. 11 

Headache, I. 16, ὃ 7 

Help to be welcomed, vil. 5, 7, 12 

Herodes, 366 

“ Heroics,’ 1 10, §2, IX. 29; XI. ὃ 

History ot ancient times, WY. 14 

Horse-racing, I. 5 

Hosts of Heaven, XI. 27 

Hypocrisy, τι 16 


Jll-omened words, XI. 3! (iipic- 
tetus) 

Imagination or opinion or impres- 
81i0NS (ὑπόληψις, φαντασία), U. 15, 
ΕΥ̓. ὁ, 7, ν. 3, 96; Vu 17, 29, 
VIE 40, ΙΧ. 7, hd. 921, 2, Ae 
ὦ, Ni 18, 7, ΧΗ 1. ὃ, 9), 
29, 26 

Immortality (see Extinction), XII. 
31 Marcus has no clear view 
ot the future of the soul, whethe: 
there 1s another lite or (he 
merely puts the alternative) 
unconsclousness, ΠῚ. 38, or a 
different sort of consclousness, 
VILL. 58, or extimction, VIL. 32 ; 
or a change of abode, survival 
fo. a tine, and finally 1e-abso1p- 
tion lito the semunal principles of 
the universe, IV 2L, v.33 But 
he longs to beheve in it, see 
Xr. ὃ 

Jmpiety, Po 1 

linpressions (har τασια), V. 2, 16, 36, 
Vi 16, 363 VEL. 29, Vill. 20, £7, 
49; certainty ol, VIL 54, 1X 6 

Indifterent things, U. 11 ad fen , 
IV. 89, VE 32, 4L3 IX. 1,$ 45 Al. 
16; even man is “ imduifferent,’’ 

220 

lugratitude, 1x. 42, § 4 

Inhumanity, ὙΠ. 65 

Tnyustice, IX 1, 4 

lustruction, AL 29, cducation, VL. 
L6 


396 


MATTERS 


Intelligence, the, Iv. 4, Vv. 27, 
xX. 88, ὃ 33; ΧΙ 14; one, Iv 
40; =Nature =God, vim. 54; 
XII. 26; ot Universe, ν. 30 

interdependence of all things, ἢ. 3, 
9,1V 29; Vv 8, 30; VI. 38. 42, 43; 
Vit. 9, 19, 68 ad. fin. ; VII. 7, IX. 
1 Gas 

Interests of whole and part ideuti- 
cal, Iv. 23; γ 8: ΥἹ 44, 45, 54; 
Χ, 6, 20, 334 ΧΙ, 25 

Intolerance, VI. 27 


Jews, 351, 371 

Justice, V. 34, efe.; toundation ot 
virtue, XI. LU, XII. 1,3, 24, and 
truth, XIr 3, 2 

Justin Maityr, remarkable parallels 
with passages in his Apologies, 
Apol 1. 18, ὅτ τοῖα! 3,$25 .Apol 
I 57=vor. 58; Apol τ. 10 Ξε Ψ1| 
33; aApol 1 19=xX 26 


Kindness Irresistible, XI 18, § 9 
Knowledge, the true, Vv. 32 


Lanuae, “it Vampires or Ghouls, 
usecl by Soerates in the sense of 
* Dugbears ” (wopmoAuKcta, pict ), 
XI. 23 

Lathusms, uw’ ovTws cimmw, LV. fs, 
σιγιλλαρια, VIT 35 1.5, ΠΡμασιανός, 
ele.s 1. 16, § 4, ovepvakdros 

Law, X 25, 338, ad fi 5 ΧΙ 1,8 2; 
Mii ot, one, ὙΠῸ 93 “all by 
law,” VIE OL; same [οἱ God and 
man, VIN 2, equality of, i lf 

Lett hand, let not, know what right 
hand does, ν. ὁ, 8 25 LA 29 

Letler-wilting, © 7, 12 

diiat, XI 1,82 

1116, a wartare, ἢ [Ὁ ; 
Me Ἐν 17... 10 10, t+, IV. 17, 35, 
45,§ 2,003 V1 15, 36,563 Ix 32; 
Ν ΩΤ. d45 ΧΙ. 18,8 65 ΧΙ 7; 
the same, long or short. [v. 17, 
ΜΠ δύ, what is, vir 3, 48, 
always the same, fv 82, Inte of 
pant ages, IV 32, 33, VE 36, 
ὙΠ 49,9 LL, XL. 1,§ 23 variety 
of, Ntr 243 only mn present, J, 
If, Wn 10, AU 1,33 ever pass- 
Nit: We Ae 17: IV 4; Vas 


ephemeral, 


INDEX OF 


hase love of, TV SU, a drama, NI 
L,@) Sih Sb, Boal of aim of, it 
lo, Vib δὸς Vill ot. wb el, 
the new life, Vil ὦν, eg Be Xs, 
as a Whole, Vall 30. another 
fite, ἃ ἧς how to enjoy, Evo 

Limb dismembered, VUE 34 

Lion, WE 2,81, Vi 36 § 2 

Lollius Urbieus, 347 

Love of neighbour, ΝῊ 22, 31, 1%. 
It, X 86,82, N10 4.9 

Love or spare Vour enennes, VI 6, 
Vif 22. 65 

Lueiis, ἃ philosopher, 37 

Lust ib tO. IX FO 


» 
‘ 


Man, tripartite (body, soul, mind), 
ik Se ΜΠ ἰός: VE Ὡς NAT 23 
intolerable, Vo oO, Stir Yt, dns 
work, Πα. 263 his relationships 
(σχέσεις). VTL ὅτ what lhe, 
x 19, beone, Vi 18,8 10, true 
interest of, HL τς reason ol -- 
(iod, XL. 26 

Many things, do not, iV. 2 Ὲ (Demo- 
criti) 

Marcus, simple hte, 1 3, 65 taught 
nt home, 1. 4: cislike ot the 
“Games,” Tf. 5, not supersti- 
thous, 1. 63 a devout worshipper, 
ΧΙΙ 2S: writes dialogues, 1.6; 
learns humility, 1. 7, eschews 
poetry, rhetoric, and fine writing 
1 7, 17, ¢p p. 346, reads Epie- 
tetus, 1 7, learns toleration, 
1 9: tact, 1 10, love ot his 
children, 1 18, 17. 1eads 
Stoic writers, 1 143 gratitude 
ol, 1 17, disposition to do 
evil, 1 17, § 13 XE 18, § +t 
annoyed with Rusticus, 1. 17,8 6, 
chastity of, I. 17, § 2; love of 
mother, 1. 17, ὃ 6; of his wite, I. 
17, ὃ 73 spits blood and has 
vertigo, 1. 17,88, bodily weak- 
ness of, 1. 17,$6,p.351; amatory 
passions of, I. 17, § 63 benetac- 
tions of, τ. 17, § 7, eschews dia- 
lectics, τ 17, § 8, not skilled in 
them, Vil. 67; νὰ i, and 
physics, 1. 17, ὃ 8, not skilled 
in them, VII. 67; grows old, II 
2,6; V 381, seep. 3493 thirst tor 
books, It. 3; address to soul, ΤΠ 


MATTERS 


6: IN. OY, eX Τὶ does not reject 
guty, ut 45 αὖ. Camuntuin, 
fio olf oad. Joes oon the Guan 
1 Wiad fin 5; a Roman, 1 ἢ, 
Mi oO, WI 445 a ruler, 111. 5: a 
bull over the herd. x1 18, 8 1, 
his nemoranda, WI 14: excerpts 
irom books, ἩΙῚ 14, (Ὁ) history 
ot ancient Greeks and Romans, 
ΠῚ 18. longing tor country 
retreats, 1V. 3, ¢p X τς dislikes 
rising in the morning, V 1. VET. 
125 not sharp-witted, + ὅς Vu 
67, hardly able to endure him- 
selt, V. LO, his service ended, v, 
sly the cout Ins stepmother, 
Vr 12; bis name Antonmus, VI. 
Yo, ἢ τι not Caesared, νὰ ju. 
conselous Of tallure, TI +, 64° V. 
9.x ὃς stilltar from plitusophy, 
vor i, hte at comt against it, 
Vill 1,9, butev SF 7s no time 
tor study, Vitl 8, death ot his 
mother. Τ 17. κα 7, Vur. 25, has 
never injured anvone, Vill 42; 
ὁ darth of a chidd, ™ ὡς ? his 
ehild all, ΠῚ 49, TX 40: weary 
ot lite and seems to wish ror death, 
IX 33 recalls his past lite, IN 21, 
playing the philosopher, In 29, 
contemns ingratitude, Ix. 42, 
$4, captures Sarmatians, xX. 10; 
feels that his death 1s desired, 
x 36, condemns Christian 
martyrdoms, XI ὃ: his Iite 
demands plilosophy, XI 7, 
wonders why men value others’ 
good opinion more than their 
own, ATL +, gruesome sights in 
War, VT 34, pestilence, IX. 2; 
Marcus a man intensely eager 
ior the common weal, XI 135, 
his patrimony, 360, regret at 
adoption by Haditan, 3860; evils 
of sovranty, 360; resists popular 
clamour, 362; firmness oi, 364, 
weeps, 368, 373; true to 
philosophy, 368, lenmty, 368, 
tree from bloodguutiness, 368 , 
detested avarice, 373; goes ta 
lectures of Sextus, 3773; death. 
376 fi 


Material and causal, see Causal 
Medley of things (κυκεών, φυρμός), 


TV. 27, VI ΤῸ; NT. ΤῈ 


307 


INDEX OF 


Meinbers, all are, of the whole body, 
VIL 135 XI ὃ 

Meteorology,! 17,338 

Mind, agitadel, viit 48 

Minister of the Gods, ΤῊ 4, ὃ 8 

Miracles, 1 6 

ΜῈ Orne no evil, i 40, ὃ 2, 

etc. 

Mouse, fable of, XI. 22 

Mountain, live as on a, X. 15, 23 

see the, XT. 18, § 11; leader of, 
ru. 





Nature, life according to, I. 9, 17, 
§5; 9; Iv. 39, 48, 51; v.3,9; 
VI 40, 58; Vulr. 1; of the Uni- 
verse, If 3, Ll; Iv ὁ, VII 75, 
vir 6, 50; ΙΧ 1, § 4: xX 20; 
XII. 28, 26; way of, 0.17; what 
it sends, Vv. 8, § 2; grumbling is 
contrary to, I 163 svuurce of 
everything, V. 18; ot plants and 
man, VII. 7; = Truth, 1x. 1. 3, 
of hving and of rational creatures, 
X. 2; only sends what we can 
bear, V. 183 VII. 46; X. 33 1esia- 
nation to, X 14; above art, XI. 
10; its products beautiful, 111. 
23; VI 86; has no waste, Vii 
50; the most venerable of 
deities, IX. 1 

Natural afiection, wanting mn the 
Patiicians, 1. 11 

Necessity, 11. ὃ, ΧΙ. 14, see Destiny 

Neighbours, fellowship with (see 
Fellowslup), 1 1, Wl 43; Vv. 16 
conduct towards, V 313,13 3,§ 2, 
27; love of, X 36, § 2 (see Love 
ofneighbour), kindliness towards, 
XI 18, 8 9; duty to, ΠῚ 11, §3 


ee eeuye (see Aim), XII. 8, 10, 18, 


Objective or external things do not 
touch us, IV. 3, ete 

Obsolete words and persons, IV. 33 

Olives, ΠῚ 2,§ 1; 1V. 483 vr. 14 

Opinion (see also Imagination, 
Impressions), nothing exists but, 
ΤΠ. 15% TW. 93. 1Υ΄ ὃς ἢ 4, 7, VI. 625 
Vit. 14: vii. 40, 49, X. ὃ. ΧΙ 18, 
§7; XI. 1, 8, 92, 25 ; harm rests 
only on, IV. 3, § 45; Vil. 14, 29; 


398 


MATTERS 


IX. 73 away with 1t, xu 25: 
ol the many, XI 523 
ee Xi J4, and chaos, rv. 27; 
VI 10 
Others’ thoughts, WL 4, Tv. 18 
Uiganic and invlgatic unity, VE 14 
Out of sight, out of mud, iv 33 


Paiderasty, 1. 16, § 1, 11.16, v.10, 
δ1, Vie 

Pain, 1 16, vu 33, 64; vitT. 28 

Pancratium, XI.2, x. 9, See also 
wrestling 

Parmularius (from parma, a small 
Thracian target or shield), one 
of a class οἱ gladiators, I. 5 

Patricians, want natural atrection 
1.1] 

Peitholaus, a physician, 362 


Pessimusin blamed, \ 10, 343 V1 
12. ΠῚ. 22 TX. 3 t IN δ, 


XE 36 

Pestilence, IX. 2 

Philosuphy, € 6, 17, $8.16 ΕΥ̓ sv. 
BU Vi. As ATO Ty Ue. 920, 
41, xt 7, the one thing, 
1 173; as schoolmaster, ἡ 9; 
heads of, XI. 18; philosupher, Iv. 
30; the tiue ones, I. 16, αὶ ὃ 

Physics, Vil 67, Vi. 16, IX 411 
(Kpicurus); X 9, 31, § 2 

Pity, 11.13, seep Nit. 

Pleasure, ν, 1,93 and pain, If. 16, 


ete. 

Plot of ground, a man’s own=hisg 
mner self, 1V 63 X 25 

Plural (2nd person), used ον 
cally, ΧΙ. ὁ 

Poetry, 1. 17, § 4 

Pompeianus, 352 

Popular applause (see Fame) 1. 16, 
$3, VI. 16, ὃ 2 

Posterity (see Fame), vi. 18 

Praise, IV. 20, t1om what sort of 
men, 1 4, δ 4 ; VI. 62, Vill 53; 
Ix 18, 27, 34° X 18, XI. 18, § 4 

Prayer, VI. 44; IX 403 of the 
Athenians, Vv. 7 

Present Time only ours, 1 14° ΤΠ], 
10; xr. 1,38,26 See Time 

Principles, see Axioms 

Proverbs, “‘ his destiny no man can 
escape ᾿᾿ (women’s proverb, from 
Plato), vol. 46; ‘ to the sweating 
state,’ I. 16,89; “the last of his 


INDEX OF 


race,’ Vur 31; “0 be of one 
bush but not of one nun” 
(ἡ gardener’s prov erb), ΧΙ 8, ** the 
second best course,’ IX 2 
Providence, TT 8, IV 3,82, 40. VI 
10. 46, 11 De, MIT 14, 2t 
Puppets οὐ maronettes, men like, 
1 ὦ, ΠῚ. ἸΟΥ͂ΣΙ 16, 28, vir 29, 
NTT [01 πὶ good sense, X 38 
Quails, I. 6 
qhuntin, the, 37.3 


Radiation of lignt, ὙΠῚ 57 

Reading—see Books 

Reason, the ruling (τὸ ἡγεμονικύμ), 
ΤΠ 2 lv 138, ὁ0θ:ν 3, 11: ΥἹ 
&: vir 5, 16, 17. 28, 333 viii 43, 
ys OLS AN Tie τ: ΧΗ 14, 
emanates trom God, mm 1, 4, 
Vv. 273 IX &, XIE 26, 30, the 
reason, IV. 4, 138, Vil.93 IX. i0, 
x 24, to follow, £ 3, the semi- 
nal, or generative, Tv. 14, 21, 
vi Yds reverence for, Iv. 16; 
civic, (Vv. 29; art of, V 14: Vu. 
40 3; shared with the Gods, Vif. 53 ; 
stands aloot, V 26; ot others, 
vil. 553 Thght reason, ΝΗῚ 353 
master in its oWn hotthe ἘΠῚ 56; 
our noblest part, V 21, vi 1634. 
133 how used by us, ν Li; x 24, 
XU. 33; to be safeguarded, ΧΙ, 
19; of Universe, 1Π|| 3, Vv. 8, 8. δ: 
γι. 36, § 2, VII 10, NIE 90; 
all rational things akin, If. 4, $4 

Regeneration of things, perlodic 
caer Mee LY, IX. 1, ὃ 4, 
28, § 23 1, ὃ 2. See also 
aie 

Repentance and regret, V. 9, 96; 
vill 16,473 ΧΙ. 19 
teser vation, under, or conditionally 
TY 1.81; VE 50, ΧΙ 87 
ovenge, the best, VI. 6 

Rhetoric, τ 7, 17,843 rhetorician’s 
lectures, my as 

River of change, see also Heraclitus 

Roman, to think as U 5, act as, 
Im. 53 ancient Romans, tin. 14 

Royal conduct, Vit. 36 

Runaway slaves, x 25 


Salvation, how gained, XII 29 
Sameness in life and world, π. 14, 


MATTERS 
IV 32,33: vil 1,49: \uE ὁ; 
Xt 1, XIE 24 

Sanctity (ὑσιύτης), V 9, XI 90, ἃ 
XIL. 


Schools, pubhe, 1. 4 

Scowling face, VII. 24 

Sentarius, a gladiator with a large 
Sammnite shield (scetuon), I. 5 

Self, retirement itu, IV. 3, §§ 1, 4: 
ὙΠ 28, 53, 595 vii 48 

Senate, VTi of), see alo p 333, 
deference to, 376 

Serene face, VI. 30, Viz. 60 

sensation, boduy, ¥. 26, ete 

Sexual pees VI 13, Vit. 21 
(MS), Xx. 

Sunes, ade: feet, teeth, 
VI ΕΝ sranal of battle, 
storming a breach, Vit. 7; drama, 
WE ὃς ΔῊ 36; doctors, TH. 13, 
VI. 25, 533 Vil Los πὸ, ys ἃ: 
xX BL,$2, Incense, TV, 15.3 head- 
land of rock, IV 49, bread, figs, 
olives, ears of corn, lun, wild 
boar, I 2; spader,Vo 13; x 40, 
bee v 1: vi ὅτ, X 8; NE ls, 
vine, V 6, § 1, ete ; imasons, V. 
8, sere eyes, V. 9, children’s 
quaniels, V 33; IX 24; flow of 
river, V 25, Vu 193 IN 29 (see 
erachtus) , snapping terriers, Vv. 
333 pet dogs, VIF. 33 fish-ponds, 
ὙΠ. ἐς ats, γι 17 Vit 3), ance. 
Vit 3, ΧῚ 225 strong smell, V 28° 
X1 153 harmony, VI 11, ball- 
play, VI 573 Vit 20; bubble 


II. 1, 
Ii ὃ, 


VII. 205 sphere, VIII. 41; cobbler 
und carpenter, VI. 50 , toun- 
tain, Vou. $1, § 2; "amphi- 
theatre, xX 83  pancratiast,, 
ΧΙ 2, XIE Ὁ; plot ot ground, 
VV 383 X 233; pig sacrificed, 


X 28; digestion, X. 31, $ 2, 
35, cylinder, X 33, § ὃ: sound 
eye, X 35; shuttle, pen, whip. 
x 388, desertion, xf 9, 20, § 2 
riding, XIT G3; banishment, x1 
360, light. ΧΙ 15, sands of the 
sea, WH od, null, xX 35 

Suupheity, TV 26,37; VII 3h; Ix. 
ot; Χο, 3:2 

Siuging, Xi, 2 

Sleep, Ti 1, Iv 46; v.1, Vr. 42 

Smoke, Vv. 29; allthings ine as, X 
Si, Xit 27, 33 See ulsu flyleat 


399 


INDEX OF 


sinyrak, earthyuake, O79, ΩΣ 

Social acts, see Fellowship 

Soul, (hoy), one, XL 305 when 
given, XM. 243 a sphere, XT 12, 
Of autmals, Ix 9,$ 2; transfel- 
ence after death, ν “Ὁ;  extin- 
wiished, Vin 823 Wn 5, 25, XI. 
3, taken up into the primary 
fue, IV 21, Vi 24, KX τὶ ἃ 2, 
scattered ito the atoms, VII. 
32, X 7,§2, ΧΙ, 33 1ts proper 
sphere, Vr t43 of God. Vv. 
S43 an exhalation from blood, 
V 3383 Vi J4,==ruoling reason, 
her own master, Vv. 19, 203 a 
istence of, after death, Vv 21, 
+ XU δὶ addressed, 11 6, ΧΙ 7 
edhe of, XI 1 

eve aking, m public, VY 0; vi. 

30, truthtul, Im. 12, 16, § 2, 

Se a ΠῚ δ: clear, ὙΠ. 51; 
freedom. of speech, VI. 30 

Spectacles, public, I 16, § 75 m 
Sparta, XI. 24. ’ See also Ὁ. 362 

Sphere, vor 41, ae 12, ΧΙ 3 

Stars, VI. 43 ; ΧΙ. 

Study, vit. 8 

Substance, as a river, v. 23 (see 
also Herachtus); one, ἈΠῸ 20. 
the Universal, VWI 1, vi 9, 19 

Suicide (ἐξαγωγή---ποῦ used by 
Marcus), Ur. Ll: V 29, VIN. 47, 
kee eX. ἡ, 83, ὃ, δ 2 (see note), 32 
'The Stores permitted suicide on 
the grounds ot patiiotism or 
philanthropy, poverty, mcurable 
ulness, senile decay, or when the 
true life could not otherwise he 
maintamed, but Marcus only 
admitted the last 

Suidas (crea 900) quotes Marcus 
29 times. and most probably 
refers to him without name on 
30 other occasions. Half of the 
quotations are from the first two 
books, and three-quarters under 
; ee first tive letters of the alpha- 
e 

Superstition, 1 6, 16, ὃ 33 VI. 30 

Suspense ot Judgment (ἀποχῆ), 1. 16, 
$95 XT. 11: ep. x0 th 


Tact, I. 10 
Talkers, 1. 
Tension Cee vr 38 


400 


MATTERS 


Things, indifferent, Τὸ 11, seed of 
olher things, IV. 36, liubsitory, 
Vo YW, Sot. ele. $s be peat them: 
selves, 1V 45° V0 OG. truly 
regarded, Wi 20 

Thoughts, mould character, ν 16 
VIE 3, open to all, Xu. 45 οἱ 
others, ΠῚ 4,8 13 our own, Tit 


Time, jost for ever, II 4; 
IV. ὃς, 88, 50; IX. 32 
See Present Time 

Tombs (or urns) 
mourners, VIII. 37 

Tradition, ΤΥ. 46 

Tragedy (see Drama), I. 6, 8 
ΠῚ 7,8, ¥ 39. τὰ 50... SER, 
XU 36 

Transformation (see Change), TV. 21: 
V 13: ΥἹ. 15: 1Χ. 19,28 

Trials good tor man, X. 33, § 4d 

Tiuth, learn to hear the, 1 tI 
note, ancdentor Vt 213" hero ” 
tiuth in every word, ΠῚ 12 , has 
‘Hed to Olympus.” Vo ὁδὶ 1s 
one, VIE 93; soul deprived of it 
mvoluntarily, νὰ 63, 9 ee , 
identical with Nature, IX 1, 
§ 2, from the heart, xr 19 

Tutor (τροφεύς), 1 ὃ, 17, δ £3; Vv. 9} 

Tyrants, Wile 91, Vi ΘῈΣ ΝΠ, 

357 

Tzetzes (about 1150) quotes Marcus, 
Chal Vit 804=IV 21; Chil vr. 
808, VOL 223=V 33, VI 15; 
Chiu. Vil 800, VIII, 224=Vvi. 13, 
ΙΧ. ὦ 


ΣῈ ΟΙ, 
xi, 7 


watched by 


ry 
’ 
4 


6 


Unity, vi. 10, 1X 9, $2 


Universe, a state or city, It, 16; 
ΠῚ If; iv 3, 8 4, 20% 
XI. 36: a oe trom ὦ and 
to it, IV -Nature, Iv. ws, 
293 ἃ hoe bemg ἵν 40 


the Universal Nature, τι. 16, 
what bencelits tt. benefits all, 
x 6, 333; harmony Οἱ, Vv.8, Vi. 
11; bound up with every part, 
v ὃ, § 3; mystery ot, Vv. 10, 
one, VI. 93; What it is, VT. 52 

Unkindness to others; 1. 16, VIIT. 34; 
thwarting one another, IT. 1 

Utopia (Plato’s), IX 295° Impos- 
sible, Vo 17; 1K [2 


INDEX OF MATTERS 


Value (ἀξία), due, set on things; 
ΠῚ. 113 1V.823 ΧΙ, 37 (Epictetus) 

Venetianus, ἃ paitizan of the Blue 
Faction mm the Circus, I. 5 

VYerus, Maitius, 343 f., 351 

Vice, v. 35; VII. 1, ete. 

Victory, miraculous, 369 

Vine, V. 6, ὃ 1; VI. id, 16; VOI. 19, 
463 Ix. 10 

Violence defined, 364 

Virtue, virtues, ITI. 6, § 1, 11, § 2; 
v. 6, 9, 12; Ix. 42 : XI. a §2. 
2; its own reward, Ἄς 65 VII. 78, 
74; IX. 42,§5; 4: fled to 
Olympus, Υ. 33 , its motion, Vi. 
17; what it is, VI. 50 

Vortex, or rotation, the external 
eircumambient (du), ΧΗ. 3; 
the soul a vortex ( pdouBos), 11. 17 


ἢ 1 


Walking barefoot, v. 8 

War, success in, IV. 483 X. 
distaste for, ΠῚ, 8; ὙΠῚ, os 9 

Web of Fate, I. 8: πὶ. 4,83, a ctr 


ne 
aan 
oO 


Iv. εὐ 34, 40:}0Υ. 8, 8.8: Vil ὅ7: 
x 

Wickedness must exist, IX. 42, §3; 
ΧΙ, 18,81; xm 16 “ΝΣ 


Wid beasts, faa 2. ᾿ξ 2. 162 AV. 
10; γ΄. 1. VI 10 


MARC, AUREL 


Vv. 53 VE. 47 
thoughts, super 


Wit, acuteness of, V 

Words, deeds, 
fluous, IV. Od 

W ay the, a aoe (see Universe), 

. 16: my. 11; 8,8 2, 4, 20° 

τὸ 15; X11. 36; tio “eye view of, 
VII 3, 48, IX. 

Worth, (see Value), to be taken into 
account, XI. 37; XU. 1 

Worthlessness of mundane things 
It, 12 

Whiestling, VII. 52, 61; see also 
panciatium=boxing and wrest- 
ing 


Wroug-doing, due to lust and 
anger, IX. 10; rests with the 
doer, V. 25; Vil. 293 IX. 20, 38 5 


X1. 13; doer harms himselt, 
IV. 26° Ix. 4, 88; involuntary. 
2V..0; 8 2; Vit 22, 63 (Plato): 
XT. 18, δὲ 2. 3% done by others, 
Vo 22. Vil ὅδ; Ix. 42; doer 
to be kindly admonished, x. Εἰ 
our own, X. 30; ΧΙ. 18, § 4 


Zeus, V. 7, 8, §§ 2,273 XI. 3; city 
of, IV. 93 = γόμος 

Zonaras (circa 1100) following 
Suldas, quotes Marcus three 
pues "each time trom the first 
rere) 


401 


I.—INDEX OF 


QUOTA'TIONS IN THE 


PROPER NAMES AND 


“THOUGHTS” 


(for other names see Inder I.) 


Aesculapius, prescribes to his 
votaries, V. 8; definite sphere ot 
work, vi. 43 

Aesop, fable of, XI. 22, 
taken irom Horace 

Agrippa, war minister of Augustus, 
VIII. 31 

Aleiphron (? the Sophist and writer 
ΟἹ fictitious new comedy letters), 
named as recently alive, X. 81 

Alexander, the Grammaiian of 
Cotiaeum, teacher and tutor of 
Marcus, 1 10 ; the Platonist 
( Clay-Plato ’ ἣν Greek secretary 
to Marcus in 174, A.D., I. 123 the 
Great, ΠΙ. 3; VI. 24: VILL. 3: ΙΧ. 
29; Χ. 27 

Annia Cornificia, sister ε ace, 
(see Introd, Ὁ. XIV.), 1. 17, § 1 

Anonymous cao done. from 
unknown tragic writer, ana- 
paestic cho1us, Vil 51; (?) sen- 
arius from unknown poet, I. 17 
ad. fin.; τι 7 cp Fiagm Ades 
p 516 Nauck , Nis 10, 0; 
(2) γι. 41; (9) ἘΦΟῚ some 
drama, VII. 43, Cp 3879; the 
old man and_ his foster: child’s 
top, v. 386; lnes otf poetical 
cast, iv. 34, 49: x 16§2 line 5; 
ΧΙ. ὃ: running straight for the 
cou, Iv. 18: sharp sight, Vill. 


possibly 


ie dienes: the Cynic philosopher, 
dueved, vil. 36 (see Diog Laert , 
VI. 

Antoninus Pius, I. 16, 17, § 3; 
IV. 333 Vi. 80; Vill. 25; Ix. 21: 
X. 273 ep. Ὁ. 386 

Apollonius, Stoic philosopher of 
Chalcedon, I 8; 17, § ὃ 


402 


Archimedes, named among acute 
wits, VI. 47 

Aretus, domestic philosopher to 
Augustus, VIII. 31 

Aristophanes, quoted, vil. 42 
(= Ach, 661), 66 (= Nubes, 362) 
Iv. 23 (=Frag.) 

Asia, a corner of the world, v1. 36 

Athenians, prayer of, Vv. 7 

Athenodotus, disciple of Musonius 
and teacher of Fronto, τὶ 18 

Athos, a clod of the ὕμπινϑυβο, Vi 


Augustus, type of departed grand- 
eur, IV. 33; VI. 5, 31; wife, 
sister and daughter of, alluded 
to, VIII. 51 


Baccheius, an unknown philosopher, 


I. 
Baiae, health resort on the coast Οἱ 
Campania, ΧΙ, 

Benedicta, an imperial Soueunes 
probably liadrian’s, I. 17, § 6 
Benetianus (=Venetianus), 866 

Index, I. 
Brutus, named with Thrasea, Cato, 
etc., 1. Lt 


Cadicianus, unknown long-liver 
Iv. 50. Possibly corrupt for 
Caecilianus, as Gataker 

Caieta, I. 17, § 8. The supposed 
scene of Faustina’s debaucheries, 
Capit. XIX. 7 

Caesar, Gaius, i.e. Julius Caesar, 
ΠῚ. 3; VI. 3; Caesars, X. 91 

Caeso, or Kaeso, Iv. 33. K. 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, ETC. 


BFubius Yibulanus killed with 
nearly the whole Fabian Gens 
ut the C'remera, in 4/9 
Cumitins, tuunde: of the 
Rome, ἔν. 33 
Capreaé, an island off Campania, 


New 


ΧΙ 27. The supposed scene of 
ΠΕ debauchenes (Taci- 
Tus 


Carnuntum, I 17 ad. fin. The 
headquarters ot Ma:cus in the 
German War (171-3. 4 D., Eutrop 
Vi, 13) uear Vienna, nuw 
Hainuburg 

Carpophourus, the Firuit-bearer,, 7 @., 
the Eaith (or Demeter), VI 43 

Catullinus, Fabius, Xt 27 Perhaps 
the consul of 130 4 D 

ΠΡΟ ΕΣ Cinna, a Stoic phnlosopher, 
i ¢ 

Cuto, of Utica, I. 14: (9) the 
Censor, Iv. 838, ey. Fionto, ad 
Caes., 1. 18; Una Δ] Porcio 
me dedreavi atgue despondr atque 
delegava (Marcus aged 23) 

Cecrops, city of (Athens) quota- 
tion from Aristophanes, IV. 23 

Celer, Caninius, a Greek rhetozician 
and Hadrian’s secretary, VIIT. 25, 
and one of the teachers of Marcus, 
see Capit., Il. 4 

Chabrias, a fieedman or favourite 
of Hadrian, VIII. 37 

Chaldaeans (astrologers), III. 3 

Charax, unknown, mentioned for 
his acuteness, VIII. 25 

Christians, ΧΙ. ὃ See Index I. 

Chrysippus, establisher of Stoicism, 
named with Socrates and Epic- 
tetus, VII. 19; on the function of 
ribald lines in a play, VI. 42 
(quoted with disapproval) ; simile 
of cylinder (Aul Gell., vii. 2, 1), 
χ. 88, ὃ 2 

Cithaeron, (Soph. Oed. Rex, 1390), 
1τὸ ΔΕ quoted from Epictetus, 
XI. 

Cleanthes, a possible reference to 
his great hymn to Zeus, xX. 28 
Clotho, the Weaver of the Web ot 

Fate, Iv. 34 

Crates, a Theban Cynic, of caustic 
wit, quoted for a remark on 
xenocrates (perhaps on τῦφος), 
VI. 133 cp. under Monmmius 


Crito, filend uf 
Xénuophon, ¥ ΔΙ 

Cioess, type ot departed grandeur, 
χοῦν 


sorrates anda 


Demetiius, the Platomst (for 
whom, and not to his credit, see 
τα, Calum 16), Via. 25 
But Arethas reters to this passage 
in a rote on Lucian, De Salt 63. 
where the Demetrius spoken ΟἹ 
is the Cynic. the triend ot 
Thrasea (ep also, Lucian, Demon. 
ας. Ade Jnd 19) Consequently 
ὁ Πλατωνικὺς Would seem to be 
an *1ior lor Κυνίκος, ΟἹ Phalerum, 
the distinguished orator, states- 
inan, aud philusopher ot Athens, 
cucd 30U, IX 29, but Schenk! 
obvelizes o Φαλημενς 

Demociates, a Pythagorean plulo- 
sopher, from whom is taken 
(so Piot Schenkl a Joc) the 
quotation, “The Universe 1s 
transtormation, and Lite 18 
opinion,” IV. 3 

Democritus of Abdera, death, hy 
lice, ΠῚ, ὃ; “(Ὁ not many 
things,” IV. 24; “all things by 
law,” VO 381; atoms. VII 981 
(see also under ‘ Epicurus ”’) 

Dentatus (Wyse’s emendation tor 
Λεοννάτος), conqueror of the 
Samnites and Pyrrhus, Iv 33 

Diogenes, the Cynic, mentioned 
with Heraclitus and Socrates. 
VIII. 3, aS writer of plays, XI 6 

TDiognetus,I 6. Some connect him 
with the recipient of the Christian 
Epistle to Diognetus 

Dion, 1. 14. generally taken to be 
the Syracusan Dion. But Dion 
of Prusa was a tiuer philosopher 
and better man, and he matches 
better with Thrasea and Hel- 
vidius. Moreover, Azethas (9) 
twice quotes Marcus in notes to 
Dio (see under ‘* Arethas,’ 
Index J) 

Diotimus, a freedman or tavourite 
of Hadilan, VII. 25, 37 

Domitius (Dometius), 1. 13) The 
Domitii were maternal (adoptiy e) 
ancestois of Marcus 


103 
9 


INDEX OF 


limpedocies, quoted, “ the sphere,” 
XU. 3, (9) VT. 413 ἀλλοίωσις, IV. 
3, V i153; Ix. 19, 28 

Hpictetus, mentioned, Vit 49: his 
** Memorabiha,” I. ΕΣ “x little 
soul bearmg a corpse ’ ” (pict. 
Piag. 26), IV. 41: Ix. 2b; 

‘words of ill- -omen a (Hpict 111. 
24, 88, 89), XI. 34; looking for 
im possibilities (Hpict. 1 24, 
86, 87), XI. 33; ‘“‘no man can 
τοῦ ἐς of our free will’ (Epict 
ΠῚ 22, 105), x£ 36; “ὁ Cithae- 
τ; “(rom Soph. Oed. Rex 1390, 
Epict. I. 24, 16), XI. 6; “ the 
house is smoky and I quit i 
(suicide, pict. 1. 25, 18), v. 29; 
‘a soul deprived of truth only 

against its will’ (γιοῦ. I. 28, 4; 
Il. 22,373; ep. Plato Rep. ΠῚ. 4.12). 
VII 63; ΧΙ, 18, § 3; Socrates 
called the opinions of "the many 
Lamiae (or μορμολυκεῖα, Epict. 
Tr. 1, 15), XI. 23; change, illus- 
trated from the grape (Epict. 
ΠῚ. 24, 91-3), XI. 353; “ "tls 
royal to do good and be abused ” 
(Antisthenes, Epict. tv. 6, 20), 
VI. 36; rules of life (Bpict. 
Frag. 27), ΧΙ. 857; ὁ». VIL. 7 
ad. wnt. 3 “ the question 1s about 
being mad or sane” (Epict. 
Frag. 28), XI. 38; elenchus on 
quarielling (Socrates, (Ὁ) from 
Mpictetus), XI. 39; hie a drama, 
(Epict. Man, 17): Xt. ἢ 
Marcus plainly Hnictelizes 
(Schol. to Codex D), mm 1, 
cp. also V. 27 

Epicurus, on intolerable pain, 
vir 33,64, account of his illness, 
Ix. 41; atoms (see also Demo- 
critus), VI. 10 (so Schol. to Codex 
D.):; VH. 333 IX. 28 5 * to 
think on great men,” ΧΙ. 26 
(by emendation ᾿Επικουρείων tor 
᾿Εφεσίων) 

Hpitynchanus, possibly one of 
Hadrian’s clientéle, vimr 25 

Hudaemon, unknown, though 
named for ability, ITI. 25. 
Vitruvius (but the reading 15 not 


above suspicion) mentions a 
celebrated astrologer of this 
name 


404 


PROPER 


NAMES, ETC. 


Kudoxus, mentioned with Hippar- 
chus and Archimedes, vi. 47. He 
was renowned as astronomer, 
physician and geometer 

Euphrates, mentioned as recently 
alive, X. 31. A Stoic philosopher 
much praised by Pliny (ip. 1. 10) 
who held that a plmlosopher 
should be a man of affairs, an 
administrator, and judge. 
Hadrian allowed him to commit 
suicide by drinking hemlock 
(Dio. 69, 8, § 2) in 118 

Euripides, quotations from, Belle- 
rophon (Frag. 289 Dind.) vil. 
38; XI. 6; ILlypsipyle (frag. 
757 D. ), Vir. 40; x1. 6; Antiope 
(Frag. 207 Ὁ.) VII. 445 XI. ὃς: 
Chrysippus (Frags 836 D.), 
vi. 50; Supplices (1. 1110), vi. 


81: unknown plays (frag. 
890, 1007. Dimd.), x. 21; vil. 
412 or Aristophanes g.v.3 XT 26 


Hurope, a corner of the Universe, 
VI. 36 

Eutyches, an unkuown philosopher, 
of previous times, X. 31 

Eutychion, an unknown philosopher 
of previous times, X. 31 


Fabius, an unknown long-liver, 
Iv 50; Fabius Catullinus, a lover 
of the country, XII. 27. See also 


Caeso 

Father, and grandfather of Marcus, 
see Verus 

Faustina, wile of aot 1.17, ὃ 
7: γ΄. 8ῖ1: Ο) 3; see also 
pp. 362, 365, 367 

Faustina, wife of Pius, vit. 25 


[Gnomologia], anecdote of Socrates 
and Perdiccas (Archelaus) from 
(?), XI. 25 

Granua, I. 17 ad. fin. The river 
Gran, near Buda-Pesth 


Hadrian, as a type of departed 
grandeur, IV. 33: VI 5, 25, 373 
X. 27. See also under Bene- 
dicta, and p. 360 

Helvidius (Priscus), an upright but 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, ETC. 


impracticable Stoic, who drove 
Vespasian to banish and put 
him to death, I. 14 

Helice, a city ot Achaia, swallowed 
by the sea 375 BC., IV. 48 

Hellenes, the Ancient Greeks, ΠῚ 14 

Heraclitus, about 500 B.c. The 
Stoics borrowed their ideas of 
Physics largely from him. Men- 
tioned with Pythagoras, Socrates, 
and Diogenes, vi. 47; VIII. ὃ, 
manner ot death, 1 33 theory 
of periodic conflagrations of the 
Universe, 15 3, Χ 7: cycles of 
change, ¥. 133; IX 283 
flux of things, ΤΠ 17; Iv. 5 ad, 
its ὃ, ν 10, Doe Ades abs 
γι. 10, 25% τ᾿. 19, αὶ Ge 
simile of river, ΠῚ 17; Iv 46; 
V. 23, Vt 15; motion above 
and below, vi. 173; [sir 1), 
IX. 28; aterchangce of  cle- 
ments, IV 46, the man that 
forgets his way, Iv 46, even 
sleepers seem to act and speak, 
tT 46: vr 642300 ** children 
from: parents’? or “‘what ou 
fathers have told us,’ iv 46; 
the soul “an exhalation from 
blood,” v. 338; VE 15; men 
at vauance with the Reason of 
the Universe, Iv. 46, wiiat they 
“encounter ὁ every day, they 
deem strange, Iv. 46; “ to think 
on great men” (? from Heracl.), 
XI. 26 

Herculaneum (Herclanum), 
troyed 79 a.D., Iv. 48 

Hesiod, quoted (Opp. 186), XI. 32; 
(itid. 197), ¥. 33 

Hipparchus, a great mathematician 
and astronomer about 150 BC., 
here mentioned with Archimedes 
and Eudoxus, vi. 47 Aur. 
Victor has a _ curious story 
(Be Caes, XI. 20) of Marcus 
punishing the people of Nicaea 
(in Bithynia) for not knowing 
(the text here is doubted) that 
tlipparchus was born there 

Hippocrates (about £50 B.c } rm ὃ. 
Till Galen the greatest of old- 
time physicians. <A tree under 
which he is said to have taught 
still exists at Cos, his birthplace 


deés- 


Homer, quoted (1. vi. 147-9), x. 
84; (abid.. vu. 99), vr. 10. 
(Od@., τ 242), Iv. 33; Cbid, Iv. 
690), V. 31, (tau. τὰν 418), 
XI. 32; (ὁ The Nexviu, Od. ΧΙ 
but see Afenippus,) IX, 2¢ 

Hymen, an unknown philosopher ot 
ἃ previous age, X. 21 


Julianus, an unknown loug-liver, 
Iv. 50 


Lacedaemonians, see Spaitans 

Lanuvinm, on the Appian Way, 
vhere Pius was born, and had a 
villa, r 16,88 

Leonnatus, 1V 38. Gne of Alexan- 
der’s Generals, and quite out of 
place among Romau vwortiues, 
see Dentatus 

Lepidus, a lover of lonz-lite, Iv 50 
Possibly the triumvir 

Lorium, a villa of Pius on the Via 
Aurelia, where he died 7 March, 
161, 1. 16, 8 8 

Lucila, Domitia (Calyia, Capit.) 
mother ot Mareus, I 17, ὃ 13 
v4, 18, 3815 Ilessons learnt 
trum jier,i ὃ: letter of Rusticus 
to. 1. 73 early death of, 1. 17, 
§ 6; Vi. 25; hfe with, Ix 21. 
See also p 360 

Lucian. possibly referred to im 
δ Menmppus and others Ake hun,” 
VI «Ὁ 

Lupus, Lusius, unknown, possibly 
a mistake for L Licuus Lucullus, 
the conqueror of Muthridates, 
whose luxurious gaidens and 
villas were well-known, XII. 27 


Maecenas, the minister of Augustus 
and friend of Horace, VIII 31 
Marclanus, an unknown philosopher, 

t 6 There was ἃ notable 
physician of this name (Marti- 
anus) 1n the time of Maicus 
Maximus, Claudius, a Stoic philo- 
sopher and teacher, highly es- 
teemel by Marcus, whom he 
thanks tue Gods that he kuew, 
117, $10, whose character he 
draws as that of a pertect man, 
τι 15, his iincss, 1. 1b ad fin. ; 


495 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, ETC. 


survived by his wite, ὙΠῚ. 25; 
possibly consul circa 145, legatus 
of Pannonia 154 and proconsul 
of Africa crea 157; the wr sanet- 
issumus of Apuleius 


Menander, quoted, in reference to 


the saying of Monimus, “all is 
vanity’ (Frag. 249 Kock). 
iw 153; more luxury than com- 
fort (Frag. 491 Kock), v. 12 


Menippus, mentioned as a mocker 


of man’s life, vi 47; his Νέκνια 
possibly referred to, Ix. 24. A 
Cynic and satirical writer, com- 
patriot of Lucian, and oiten 
introduced by him into his works 
The Schohast (Arethas, qv) on 
Lue Pisce. 26, refers to this 
passage of Marcus 


Monimus, a Cynic and pupil ot 


Diogenes, quoted from Menande1 
(q te “all opinion Is vanity,” 
Il, 


Nero, coupled with Phalaris, 1m. 16 


O 


Ρ 


riganion. unknown, lately dead, 
VI. 47 


anthela, the concubine of Lucius 
Verus, and mentioned as watch- 
ing his tomb (urn) The writer 
otf the dialogues Imagines and 
Pro Imagiuibus (attributed to 
Lucian) speaks in very high 
terms of her beauty and 
character, VIII. 37 


Pergamus, a treedman or tavourite 


of Lucius Verus, Vi. 37 


Pei diccas, king of Macedonia (pro- 


bably a mistake for Archelaus) 
in connection with Socrates, 
XT. 25 


Phalaris, the typical tyrant, ΠῚ 16 
Phalereus, see Demetrius, (x. 29 
Phiip, King of Macedonia, men- 


tioned with Alexander and Deine- 
trius ot Phalerum, IX. 203 with 
Alexander and Croesus, X 27 


Phihstion, unknown, lately dead, 


vi. 47 


Phocion, the great Athenian. ance- 


4 


dote of (ep Musonius Rufus, p 
δῦ, ed. Hense), XI. 13 


οὔ 


Phoebus, 


Prasianus (Prasinus), 


Quad, 1. 


unhnown, lately dead, 


Vi. 47 


Pindar, quoted (from Plato, y¥.».), 


“the secrets of Hades,” πὶ 13 


Plato, his Utopia, Ix. 29; quotation 


(? dropped out) vir. 48° or, 
“the stars im their courses,” 
‘the mire of earthly life,’’ vir 
47, Socrates on his trial (poi. 
28, B,D.), Vir. 44, 45; Pindar 
quoted by (Theaet 173 Ἔ.), πὶ, 
135 wise man in city lke 
shepherd on the hills (Vheaet. 
174 D.), X. 23; goodness, and 
love of life (Gorg. ch 68, 512 Ὁ}. 
vir 46; death no evil, Rep. vI 
486 A, VII. 85; Socrates as the 
true philosopher (Plato, Z'trn. 61, 
D.), ΠῚ. 6. See also Ὁ 360 


[Plutarch], perhaps quoted,Iv 10 


vo. 52; reteried to, v. 1, § 2 
See also under Sextus 


Pompeu, destroyed by Yesuvius, 


79 A.D., IV. 48 


Pompelus, named with Caesar and 


Alexander, II. 3; VIII 
Gens Pompeid las 
VIII. 31 


33 the 
died out, 


a paLrtizan 
of the Green Faction in the Circus 
1.5; Lucius Verus, whose horse 
Kher (Volucris) was ridden undel 
the Green colours, untairly 
favoured the Greens, and on one 
occasion, while presiding at the 
games with Marcus, had a hostile 
1eception from the »spectators 
Capit. Vit. Ver., vi. 2 


Pythagoras, named with Herach- 


tus and Socrates, VI. 47, 
quoted, ‘“‘ the stars in 
courses,” XI. 27 


tenet 
their 


17 ad. fine A (German 
tribe οἱ the modern Moiavia, who 
with the Marcomanni were the 
chief enemies of Marcus in the 
first war, 170-174 They mearly 
repeated the exploit of Arminius 
in the so-called ‘‘ miracnlous 
victory’? in 174 (or, as Domas- 
zewski, 171), pp. 369, 371 


Quotations from unknown authors, 


see Anonymous 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, ETC. 


Rome, vi 41 

Rutius, see Velius 

Rusticus, Stoic philosopher, teacher 
and intimate friend of Marcus, 
who, as», wefectus urbi, condemned 
Justin to maityrdom; lessons 
learnt from him, selt-discipline, 
contempt of dialectics, theoric, 
rhetoric, poetry and fine wuiting, 
not to be a prig, to cultivate 
good taste, simplicity in letter- 
writing, sweet 1Leasonableness, 
care In reading, suspicion of 
volubility, and a knowledge of 
Tipictetus, 1.7, 17,8 4; M. some- 
times offended with, 1, 17, § 6 


Salamninian, the (Leo), Socrates sent 
ny the Thirty Tyrant» for, ΝΠ 


Sarmatians, these appear as enemies 
about 174, 4.p ,X. 10 They were 
a Slav people from the present 
Poland and Russia. Their 
women fought. 

Satyron, an unknown philosopher 
ot recent time, X. 31 

Scipio,1V 33 

Secunda, wife of Maximus, Vit. 25 

Severus, called “ brothe1,” © 14; 
and so probably the tather of 
Claudius Severus, who married 
one of Marcus’ daughteis (? 
Fadilla). But he seems to have 
been a philosopher and is pos- 
sibly identical with the Peitpat- 
etic philosopher Severus (Capit. 
Wit Mar, ΠῚ. 3), mentioned, 
xX. 31. Marcus was himself at 
one time called Severus, Capit. 
τ, 9, ep. Galen, Vil. 478 Kuhn 

Severus, Catilius, maternal great- 
grandfather of Marcus, who 
expected to succeed Hadrian, 


I. 4 

Sextus of Chaeronea, a Stoic philo- 
sopher, grandson of Plutazch, 
τ. 9. Marcus made him his 
assessor on the bench (so Suidas) 
and attended his lectures late 
in life (Philost. Vit. Soph , τί. 9) 

Sextus Empuiricus, of date uncertain 
hut probably near the end of the 
2nd = century He was an 
“empiric ’”’ physician and the 


great champion of Sceptical 
Philosophy, possibly quoted 
(adv. Jfath. Iv. 81), vi. J4, 
“all is vanity ” (from ‘fonimus, 
866 adiso Menander; sSext Emp 
τι. 1), 11. 15 

Silvanus, an unknown phuosopher 
of ἃ plevious age, X. 31 

Sinuessa, a coust town on the border 
of Latinm and Campania, letter 
of Rusticus from, f. 7 

Socrates, named with Heraclitus 
and Pythagoras and Diogenes, 
VI 473 Vur 38, with Chrysippus 
and Hpictetus, Vi. 193 puble 
acts and character, VIE. 66; 
conduct With Nanthipne, AI. 28; 
his self-control (Ὁ irom SNenophon, 
qv), I. 16, ad fin.: Ins trial, 
vir 44, £5; kited by (human) 
vermin, YW. 33; quoted (trom 
Epictetus, gc )on the notions of 
the vulgar, XI. 23; (? trom Ep- 
ctetus, g.v ) on rational souls, XI 
389; (rom Plato, gv) on a soul 
freed from seuse-lmpresslons, IIT. 6 

Socraticus, an unknown philoso- 
pher of previous times, X. 91 

Sophocles, «uoted from Epictetus 
(Oed. Ret, 1391), XI ὁ 

Spartans, courtesy to 
ΧΙ. 24 

Stertintus of Balae, XII. 27. Pos- 
sibly the το physician ot 
Naples, Plmy, NV A , XXIN. 5 

Stoics, lacty of the Universe 
unintelligible even to V 10 


strangers, 


Sena tae an unknown philosopher, 

Ι 

Telauges, son of Pythagolas and 
Theano (see Diog. Laert Pyth. 
XXII. 26), VII. 66 

Theodotus, a freednmian 01 muinion 
of Hadrian (probably), 1, 17, ὃ 6 

Theophrastus, the successor of 
Aristotle in the Peripatetic 
Philosophy, quoted trom with 
approval, “offences due to lust, 
and to auger,” I. 10 

Thrasea, tne noble Stoic put to 
death by Nero m 63 Hip last 
words were addressed to Deme- 
trius the Cyure (tor whom see ain 
Demetrius), I. 14 


407 


INDEX OF 


Tiberius, at Capreae, XU. 27 

Trajan, an instance ot past grandeur 
IV. 32 

Tropaeophorus, unknown ae: 
pher of a previous age, 

Ne now Frascati, in ea aii 
I, 


Valerius, see Volesus 

Velius Rufus, unknown, XII. 27 

Verus, M. Annuus, erandtather of 
Marcus, 1, 1,1 17, ἃ ΤΣ 1Σ, 2] 

Verus, Annuus, father of Marcus, 
Ι. ῶγ. 4, 13, O15 VIII. 25; 1x 91 

Verus, Lucius Aurelius, adapted 
brother and son-in-law ot Barcus, 


408 


PROPER 


NAMES, ETC. 


1.17,§ 43 viit. 37. See also pp 
367, 387 

Volests, or Volusus, undoubtedly 
P. Valerius Volusi tilius Poplicola, 
the hero of the first years of the 
Republic, descended ‘from the 
Sabine Say Volesus (Sil. Ital. 
ΤΙ, 8), IV. 


Xanthippe, the shrewish wife ΟἹ 
Socrates, XI 28 

Xenocrates, a Platonist philoso- 
pher from Chalcedon, Vi. 138 
see Crates 

Xenophon, perhaps ‘juotation from 
(Sfem. 1. ὃ, 15), 1 16, § 9, xX. 91 


TT.—_GLOSsARY 


ἀδιαφορυ (= μεσα) V. 20, VI. 32, 41, 
45, Vu. 31; VII. 56: XI 16, 
things indifterent, ge mnenher 
good nor bad = (1) things abso- 
lute ly indifferent, such as the 
nuniber of pebbles on the shore, 
(2) προηγμένα, things to be chosen 
as having a relative value, as 
rood health , (3) ἀπροηγμενα, to 
be rejected, as ot less relative 
value ep Fronto, De Flog 


Nab. p 148 
21; vur S4:Irx 9; 


ἀςρῶδες, τό, IV. 4, 
x. 7, § 2 From ἃ compatison ΟἹ 
these we get τὺ στερεμτιοι = τὸ 
γεῶδες (earth), τὸ Vypor Sick 
πὸ πυκευματικὺὸν = τὸ ἀερῶδις (X 7, 
§ 2, the spuitual or pneumatic into 
airy or aeiial), τὸ πυρῶδες (fire) 
=? τὸ νοερόν, cp. ΧΙ 20) 

αἰτία τὸ ator, To αἰτιῶδες (see Sen- 
esa, Hp. 65), "the Causal, Formal, 
or Formative Prineiple which 
makes a thing what it is, con- 
trasted with vAq (matte), Iv. 21; 
Vie ὃ, Ve 239: Ville 8, 11 - XI: 8, 
10, 18, 29; the Primary Cause, or 
Nature, or God, vIlt 27; 1x 29; 
Individual Cause in Man. vir 

; Ix. 31, X 26; the Quality of 

ihe Cause, 1.6 the power it has oF 
making a thing what αὖ 18, Ix. 
absorbed into the λύγος οἱ Bie 
Universe, VII. 10, Destiny, the 
primal Cause and sum of all lower 
causes, V. 8 

ἀκατάληπτος, ἀκαταληψία, IMposst- 
ΠΥ of any certain conviction, 

. 10; vir 54. It was the main 

ὑπο ΓΕ of the Sceptics that 
nothing could be really known, 


OF GREEK 


TERMS 


but even Socrates and his suc- 
cesso1s said sinwar things Epi- 
etetus stoutly maintains the con- 
trary 

ἀκ ινώνητος, One Who selfishly disre- 
vards the common imterests and 
cuts himself adrift from his fel- 
lows; Wf 1, 2% Π|. δ; vir of: 
x. Os ΧΙ. 18 ad fin.; XIL. 23 

ἀναφορά, the reference of a thing to 
its end or purpose, its relation to 
its objective, with Cause and 
Matter making up the whole 
thing, XI. 8, 10, 18, 20) 

ἀξία, (1) the trne value οἱ worth of 
things, (2) the relative value of 
ἜΠΗ preferential, ΠῚ. 11: Vi ὃ, 
ete. 

amct ta, the passionless calm of the 
true Stoic, 1 9 (of Sextus); VI. 
16; x1 18 ad fin , ep atupatle 

ἅπαξ λεγομένς, words only found (it 
seems) In Marcus are: ἀκύβεντος 
Ι. 8, ἵἀνδρου!ομεῖσθαι NX. 19: ἀν» 
θύλλιον TV. 20; ἀπαλλακτιᾶν X. 365 
UTOKALTAPL οὔσθει VI 90; «πτορρέμβ- 
εσθαι TH t3 IV 22; ἀπροστάτητος 
xu 14; ἀρεσκευτικὺς I 16: ἀφυ- 
σιολογήτως X. 93 ἀψικάρδιος IX. δι 
γσλάκτιον V ἃ, γλισχρεύεσθαι .ὅ: 
γλώσσημα Iv 88; ἐμφιλοτεικ νεῖν 
VIL. δὲ, Ἰἐνοργησείειν WI. 7; ἐν 
τέ ριον (9) VI. 13; [εὐχαριεντίξεσθαι 
1. 13: καλοηθῆς I. 1: KOLYOVONMOTUL ἢ 
I. 16; puidcov VIL. "3; μυξάριον IV. 
48, Vi. 13, ὁμοδογματεῖν IX. 35 
XI. 8; ὁμοθυμπηεῖν XL. 83 παραζητεῖν 
XI. 53 περιφορος I 15, προπτωτ- 
ικὸς ΧΙ. 10; προσρησσεσθαι ry. 49; 
ῥιπταστικος I. 163 σεμνοτυφία IX 
29; σμαράνδιον IV. 20, στρωμάτιον 


409 


GLOSSARY OF 


V. 13 συγκατατήκεσθαι V. 15 συμ- 
μηρύεσθαι 1π|. 11; VII. 233 cupp)- 
ρυσις IV. 403 συμπεριφαντάζεσθαι 
X. 88; συμπροσπίπτειν VII. 22; X. 
315 XI. 27; συννεμφέρειν ΠῚ +; 
συννήθειν (?) IV. 343 τριγερήνιος, 
IV. 503 ὑπέρτασις, X. 83 φαντα- 
σιοπλήκτως, 1. 7; χυλάριον VI. 13 

ἀπροαίρετα, things not in our choice 
or power, XII. 3, 23, 33 

apxat, Zeno recognized θεὸς (τὸ ποι- 
οὔν) and ὕλη (τὸ πάσχον) aS ἀρχαὶ 
or Beginnings 

atapavia (cp. ἀπάθεια) IX. 31, free- 
dom from perturbation atexternal 

things 

ἄτομοι, IV. 8: VI. 243 VIE. 32, 50; 
VIII 17; IX. 28, 39; X. 6; XI. 18. 
Indivisible atoms endowed with 
motion were, according to Demo- 
critus, and after him Epicurus 
and Lucretius, the origin of all 
things without any First Cause. 
Marcus often puts this view, but 
only to reject 1t 

ἀφορμή = means. Marcus does not 
use the word in its Stoic sense of 
‘‘disinclination ”’ )( ὁρμή 


δαίμων, evil spirit, I. 6; good, X. 
138; = εὐδαιμονία, VIl. 17; the 
“genius” or “daemon” within us, 
11.13, 17 5 11.6, 7, 12,165; vir. 45; 
X1I.8; given by Zeus to us, V.27; 
= θεός, V. 10; = νοῦς, IT. 3 

διάλυσις, VIT. 50, etc ; a breaking up 
of things into their component 
parts, and the subsequent sifting 
out of these into the elements 

διάνοια, faculty of thought, or mind, 
Il. 13 = λογικὴ Wuyxy, VI. 823 not 
affected by the motions of the 
πνεῦμα, IV. ὃ 

διαπνεῖσθαι, to breathe through the 
veins and arteries, a medical 
theory (see Gataker in loc. for il- 
lustrations from Galen), m1. 1, 
VI. 16 

δόγμα, ἃ postulate, axiom, or prin- 
ciple established by reason and 
experience; what the sensations 
are to the body and impulses to 
the soul, δόγματα are to the intel- 
ligence, ΠΙ|Ι. 16; called ‘ sacred,” 
Χ. 9. See κρῖμα and θιωμημα 


410 


GREEK TERMS 


εἶδος, only used once (XI. 20) in its 
philosophical sense of “ general 
term,” *‘ class,” or ‘‘ species” 

εἱμαρμένη, ἡ, destiny, 11%. 6; Vv. 8, 
etc. ; =Clotho, IV. 343 τὰ συγκλωθ- 
dueva, TH. 4, 11, 16; Iv. 26; 
ἡ πεπρωμένη, 1Π. 8; τὸ συμβαῖνον, 
Iv. 44 etc, 

ἔκκλισις, avoidance )( ὄρεξις (¢.0.), 
VII. 7; ΧΙ. 837. The things that 
are ‘‘ within the man” are κρισις 
judgment, ὁρμὴ impulse, ὄρεξις 
propension towards, ἐκκλισις 
aversion from, a thing, VIII. 28; 
but the latter must be reserved 
only for things in our power, 
ΨΊΠ. 7; Sls 87 

ἐκπύρωσις, Cyclical conflagiation of 
the Universe, a doctrine of 
Heraclitus (ῳ v.), II. 3. Justin 
Apol. u. 7 points out the dif- 
ference between the Stoic and 
Christian view of this conflagra- 
tion (2 St. Peter i. 7, 10) 

ἔννοια, conception, thought, or no- 
tion not amounting to a convic- 

s tion (δυγμα), bub κοινὴ evvow = 
φαντασία καταληπτική, & conclusive 
conviction. See πρόληψις 

ἐξαγωγή = suicide does not occur, 
but see It. 1 (ἐξακτέον) 

ἕξις, VI.143 VII.16; x1. 18; x1 16. 
Lucian, Conviw. 238, says, τί δια- 
φέρει σχέσις ἕξεως 5 andin Hermot. 
SL he laughs at the jargon of 
philosophy with its ἕξεις and 
σχέσεις, Its καταλήψεις and φαντα- 
σίαι. ἀχέσις, feature; ἕξις, ἃ 
simple essential form or quality 
(ποιότης) 3 φύσις, aforming power, 
VI, 14 

εὐδαιμονία, harmony of man’s will 
(δαίμων) with God’s = evpora βίου, 
VIE. 17 ok 

evpous, εὐροιῖν (evpora, Hpict. i. 4. 6), 
the calm even flow of the virtuous 
life = εὐοδεῖν, V. 843 X. 63 even 
of Zeus himself, Vv. 83 εὕρουν καὶ 
Geovdy βίον, τι. 5 | 

ἐνέργεια, the activity of the ψυχὴ 
contrasted with πεῖσις (g.v ) = the 
passivity of the body, V. 20, etc. 


ἡγεμονικόν, τό (OL τὸ κυριεῦον, τῷ 
προαιρετικόν, VIM. 56), the Ruling 


GLOSSARY 


Reason (g.v.) or Principle (or 
Inner Self, Rendall), 1.2; 1v 1; 
V. 26; ΧΙ, 14, etc. = Aoyos, φύσις, 
ΟΥ̓ even τέχνη λογική, V 43 VILL. 7 
(cp. ψυχή, V. 82): διάνοια, VII. 
64, 68; νοῦς, IX. 223 I.16, X 
Zt; ΧῚ 3; sometimes even Οἱ 
God, VI. 753 IX. 22 


θεώρημα, ἃ truth perceived in 
Science, 1, 7, § 4,8; mv. 2; m 
ithics = δόγμα, ἃ principle or con- 
Viction, τὸ θεωρητικόν, the tacultyv 
of pure thought, X.9, p 375 


καθῆκον", τὸ = officwm, duty. Among 
Ta καθήκοντα, duty in the highest 
sense perfectly pertormed, is κατο- 
optwue (not used by M.). κατορ- 
θώσεις, V. 14, are acts that are the” 
outcome of right reason 

κατάλήψις, VI 80 (καταλαμβάνειν, 
καταληπτικός (IX. 6), ἀκατάληπτος), 
an important term in the Stoic 
philosophy meaning a ‘‘ true com- 
prehension’’ or ‘clear percep- 
tion” of a thing, without which 
no right conduct im lite is pos- 
sibie See under συγκαταθεσις 

κατόρθωσις, see καθῆκον 

κίνησις, Motion = change, V 10° in 
the flesh (Epicurus), X 41; of the 
senses, VIII. 26; of the flesh 
(smooth or rough), X. 8, to anger, 
fear, etc, XI. 20; of the mind, 
vit 55; of virtue, VI. 17; )( σχέσις, 
Vit. 60; XI. 2; tension (τόνος), 
VI. 38 

κοινὸς and its kindred words occu 
over eighty times, and Marcus 
apparently coins the beautiful 
word κοινονοημοσύνη (1. 16), which 
deserves to rank with the “ loving- 
kindness” of Coverdale’s Buble. 
See under Fellowship 

κρίμα, Conviction, almost = δόγμα, 
Iv 3, §2; judgment, v. 193; vii. 
475 XI, 11. cp. κρίσις, VI 52, etc , 
the antecedent to ὁρμή, VII. 16, 
28; of the Christians, xI. 3; 
= ὑπόληψις (φαντασια), XI. 16, 18 

7 

3 


OF GREEK TERMS 


λόγος (λογικός), reason or the reason, 
I. 8; Il. 10; Iv. 13, 16, 19, 24, 30, 
33, V. 8, 9, 14, 28: vr. 23, 30, 
Vil. 8, 11, 24; VIII. 48; rx. 10, 42; 
X. 31,52 (νοῦς καὶ A ): right reason, 
(= vutue, Οἷς. Tuse iv. 15. 34), 
IH. 6, 125 XI. 9, xu. 35, civic 
reason, IV 29; rx 12; common 
to Gods and men, vII 53: ἃ of 
Nature, Iv. 20; V 32: VI 58: ὙΠ]. 
10; common to all intelligent 
creatures,iIvV Φ Vir 9; =a man’s 
self tr ἡγεμονίκον, g.v.), VII 40; 
convincing reason Ii. 53; Iv. 24, 
σπιρμστικοὶ λόγοι, of the Universe 
into which all things are taken 
back = seminal principles, Iv. 14, 
213 VI 24; τ λύγὺς only, ὙΤΙ. 10, 
X. 7; λογικός, apphed to ζῷον, 
nyeMoveKoN TeX, Hua, ψυχὴ 


οιησις, seli-concelt or illusion, Iv. 
12, IX S£, XII. 27 

otkovoutu, IV 19, 51, XE. 18, § δ; 
management, and so policy, ex- 
pediency, adaptation to circum- 
stances, ulterior end, secondary 
purpose, and even finesse. We 
keep the double sense of the word 
ln our *‘ economy of truth’’ 

opcéts, propension or inclination to- 
wards a thing, of which the result 
is »pu~ and the incentive davracia, 
IX. 7. cp. VII. 38. )( εκκλισις, 
VIIL 7 See under πάθος 

ὁρμὴ = φορὰ ψυχῆς ἐπί τι (Stob Eel 
u. 160), impulse of the mind to- 
wards a thing (866 vpeés), result- 
Mg In a πάθος 

σιοτῆς = δικαιοσυνὴ πρὸς Geo, plety, 
sanctity, holiness 

ουσία, Substance or Being, some- 
times = ὕλη, matter; )( Wuxi, 
Ivy 40 


πάθος, the ‘affect’ resulting through 
πεῖσις LOM ὁρμὴ, the second stage 
of ὠρεξις, which depends itself on 
assent (συγκαταθεσι)  Stobaeus 
defines it (Mel. ii. 164) as a mo- 
tion of the Soul contrary to Na- 
ture, παθηλογεῖν VIL 13, to study 
the wat = Ethics 


414 


GLOSSARY OF GREEK TERMS 


παλιγγενεσία, XI. 1; cp. Vil.19. The 
Stoic theory was that every- 
thing repeated itself in periadic 
cycles, when the world was re- 
newed again after each confiagra- 
tion (see ἐκπύρωσις and under He- 
raclitus); ep. Chrysippus, περὶ 
προνοίας, *‘ there will be another 
Socrates to lve the same life 
again’’?; and Seneca, Hp. 36. 
10, “‘veniet iterum qui nos 
in lucem reponat dies.” But 
whether Marcus believed in this 
dismal theory 1s very doubtful, 
ep. X. 51. 

παρόταξις, opposed line in battle, so 
opposition, not obstinacy (XI 3) 
ΠῚ. 3; vil. 48. See also p. 381. 

πεῖσις (evepycio, V 1, a passive con- 
dition antecedent to ἃ κίνησις in 
the case of the body, correspond- 
ing to an ἐνεργεια of the mind, 
11. 63 V. 26; VI. 51; Vit. 55, 
ΙΧ 16 

meptodor, V. 18, 82; X. 7. See παλιγ- 
γένεσια 

πνεῦμα = ἄνεμος, U. 2; the surround- 
ing air, IX. 2; the inferior part 
of the ψυχὴ as distinct from νοῦς, 
Iv. 3; 1t and its motion quite 
distinct from the διάνοια, IV. 3. 
Marcus does not seem to use the 
word in the sense of Atmospheric 
Current unless xi. 30 aifords an 
instance, 

πνεύματα, What remaims of things 
when οὐσία, ψυχή, and νοερὰ ψυχὴ 
are subtracted, XII. 30 

πνευματικόν τό, the Soul (= τὸ wre 
pariov) Οἱ which the πνεῦμα or 
breath element at death goes 
back mto τὸ ἀερῶδες, and the νοῦς 
into τὸ πυρῶδες, IV 45 X 7: XI.20 

πνευμάτιον, TO=(1) ψυχὴ (Soul) in its 
lower sense (σῶμα, πνευμάτιον, 
vous, XII 14) 1. 2; vir. 56; Ix, 
36; XIX ὃ, 14; (2) ψυχὴ in its 
higher sense, including the νοῦς, 
v. 26, 33; vr. 14: ΙΧ. 8, 34; 
XII. 80, the enveloping body and 
the πνευμάτιον that has grown 
with its growth, x1. 3; the vital 
breath which will be quenched or 
transferred elsewhere, VIII. 25, 
the sphere of it and the body 


412 


outside our power, V 33; unstable 
like all matter, IX. 36; burdened 
with the body, rm. 24. See under 
ψύχωσις 

ποιότης, τὸ ποιὸν, the property, qual- 
ity, οὐ form of a thing (almost = 
the Cause which makes 1t what it 
is, IX. 25): τὸ ἰδίως ποιὸν, separate 
individuality, VI. 3; 1X. 25, X. 7, 
xt. 30 

πολιτικός, MOStly = κοινωνικὸος. See 
κοινός 

προαίρεσις, free will or choice. See 
under ἀπροαίρετα 

προαιρετικόν, τό (-- τὸ Hy porixdr), the 
faculty of choice, viii. 56 

προηγούμενον, τό, the leading or car- 
dinal thing, VII. 55; vu 40, 
ΙΧ. 41 Marcus does not use the 
Stoic expression τὰ mponyyeva 
things preferential 

προληψις = ἃ primary conception 
possessed by all rational heings, 
Chrysippus in Diog. Laeit vii 
53 (vrow φυσικὴ τῶν καθ᾽ ὁλου), 
Perceptions (φαντασίοσι) resulting 
from sensation (αισθησιςὺ produce 
impressions (τυπώσεις) which re- 
peated form memory and many 
memories make experience which 
gives us conceptions (προλήψεις) 


σκεδασμός, σκορπισμός (Cp. διάλυσις), 
a disintegration of things into 
their component atoms (VI 24; 
Vit 32; ΠῚ. 25) or elements. See 
unde: Dispersion and Dissolution 

σκοπός (Or redAos, V 15, 16), the end 
or objective of life, 16, vir 4; 
ΧΙ. 6, 21; to which every ὁρμὴ 
and φαντασία should be directed, 
1. 7. See under Aim, Objective 

σπερματικὸς λογὸς (see under λόγος), 
IV. 14, 21; vr. 24; ΙΧ. 1 ad fin. 
= the Generative Reason, because 
the Primary Fire or Reason con- 
tains in it the Germs of all things. 
The σπερμ λόγοι are the creative 
and forming forces in Nature 
which have produced (1) the Uni- 
verse as a whole, and (2) indi- 
vidual things individually. Jus- 
tin, Apo/. il. 8. 13, applies the 
Stoic term to Christ 


GLOSSARY OF 


στοιχεῖα, τά, the elements, earth, 
water, air, fire, 11. 3.173; vi. 17, 
IV. 4; Χ. 71 XI 20, etc.; almost= 
atoms, VI.17; ὙΠ. 31 

συγκατάθεσις, the full mental assent 
required for ἃ convincing impres- 
SION (φαντασια καταληπτικύή) before 
convictions (δύγματα) can be trans- 
lated into movement and action, 
but even this is hable to error, 
γ. 10. See under rados 

σύγκριμυ συγκριματιον, the com- 
pound—man, VII. 67; VIE 23; XT 
2U, composite things ) στοιχεῖα, 
1.3, γι. 10= κυκεώτ', the ‘ farrago’ 
of things; σύγκρισις )( λύσις, XIE. 
24, 36; the elements comprising 
the σῶμα, 1. 17 

συμπάθεια, sympathetic connexion 
or affinity of the parts in an or- 
ganic whole, Vv. 26, Ix. 9, § ἃ; 
mutual interdependence, IV. 27 

συνείδησις, It 13 curious that Mar- 
cus never uses this Stoic equiva- 
lent for ‘Conscience,’ but see 
εὐσυνείδητος, VI. 80 ad fin. 

σύστημα, an organized body, or or- 
ganism, the parts of which have 
a relation to one another 

σχίσις, ἃ non-essential quality or 
teature of a thing, Χ κίνησις = rest 
(Rendall), vit. 60, XI. 2; attitude 
or relation towards other things, 
1. 12: Vir 385 Vi. 27: ΧΙ 18. 
Three σγέσεις, (1) towards the 
body, (2) towards God, (3) to- 
wards our neighbour, VII. 27. 
See under ἕξις, κίνησις 

σῶμα, τὸ ἰσωμάτιον, σάρξ, σαρκία 
(plur.), σαρκίδιον, kpeddior] ἃ com- 
pound of τὸ γεῶδες and τὸ ὑγρόν, 
together forming τὸ στερέμπιον, 
1v. 4; Χ. 7: the vessel or sheath 
of Soul, 1%. ὃ: Vil. 27; IX. 3; 
that which overlays the Soul, 
Xi, 2, 3 


+e) 


τελος, 3606 σκοπός 

τόνος (τονικύς) = tension imparted to 
soul by atmospheric substance 
therein existing (Zeller), the cause 
of virtues and vices. Zeller also 
says that the Stoics imagined two 
soits of motion, the one (= our 


GREEK TERMS 


Repulsion) tending outwards and 
giving rise to the yualities of mat- 
ter, the other (our Attraction) 
tending inwards and causing con- 
densation. Cleanthes calls τόνος 
ἃ πληγὴ πυρὸς 


ὕλη, τὸ ὑλικόν, Matter on which the 
αἴτιον (g.v ) acts 

ὑποκείμενον, 76 (Or plural), matter not 
in its primary condition but as 
formed by the atriov, VIE. 29; 4 
ὑποκειμένη VAN, IX. 363 ali material 
things and objects, V 10; Vi. 4, 
23, Vur, 22, 24, x. 3; Χ, 18 

ὑπεζαίρ.σις, IV. 1, V. 20; VI 50; 
XI 37, exception or reservation; 
ep. ‘‘sapiens ad omnia cum er- 
ceptione (μεθ᾽ ὑπεξαιρέσεως) Venlet, 
gi nihil inciderit, quod impediat”’ 
(Seneca, De Benes. 1v. 34) 

ὑπόληψις, Opinion, mMagination; all 
things are merely what we think 
them to be, It. 15, 1v 3, ad fin: 
xm. 8, 26; away with opinion! 
ty. 7: Vit 40° XI. 18. 8 Τ; XT. 
22, 25; leave the fact as 1t is and 
add no opinion to it, VY. 26; hold 
the power of forming opinions 
sacred, 11.9; ἃ ὕπολ καταληπτικὴ 
(ᾳ.υ.) amounts to ἃ truth, Ix. 6. 
See under havracca and κρίσις 

ὑπόστασις, substance, IX 1 ad fn. 
subsistence, IX. 42; Χ ὃ 


φαντασία, impression, thought, no- 
tion, don’t go beyond first im- 
pressions, VIII 49: they dye or 
stamp the soul, V 16; V1. 16, sift 
them, VIII. 26; appraise them 
aright, V. 363 φαντασία καταληπ- 
tian, UuTesistible impression that 
carries assent, IV. 22; ὙΠ. 54, 
wipe it out, IV 24; V. 2; vi. 17, 
29, Vil. 29; IX. 7. See under 
ὑπόληψις and κρίσις 

φυσιολογεῖν, ὙΠῚ, 13 = Physics; ep. 
tx 41; x. 9; so of the physio- 
logical disquisitions of Herachtus, 
1, 3: eg. IX 41 (trom HEpicurus). 


ψυχὴ, Wexapior, Man = σῶμα. ψυχή, 
vous, II. 16; but the Soul (ψυχή) 
twofold, (a) = πνευμάτιον (rvcupa), 


413 


GLOSSARY OF 


an exhalation tivin blood (ava- 
δυμιᾶσις, Vv 38, Vi, 15), and 
an inhalation (ἀνοπνευσι) trom 
the wir: (ὦ) ἡ νοερά, Aoyinn, VI 14, 
32; ΙΧ. ὃ, ΧΙ, 1; Xm. 80; poy, 
Ξ- τὸ ἡγιμονικόν, 1. 16 ad fin , 
IV. 41; V. 26, 1x. 3, 27, 34, an 
emanation from God, ΧΙ, 26: 
imprisoned mm the body, ΤΠ. 7; 
cp. Int p. xiv. The natural soul 
18 called poy Bés, a vortex or cur- 
rent, i 17, § 1; the rational 
soul a sphere, XI 12, its attri- 
butes, <1 1,82 There ts a Soul 


ae 


GREEK TERMS 


oi the Universe, ΠῚ cu, 62, and 
ul God, Vo 34, the two being 
really the same 


ψυτωσις It wasa view of the Stuics 


that the embryo in the womb had 
only the φυσικη Ψψυχη ot plants 
and that the vocpa ψυχὴ Cane 
giadually to the child atter birth 
by contact with the (cold) air, 
Mt. 24 It was by the respiration 
Οἱ the atmospheric πνεῦμα that 
the child received the πνευμάτιον 
Vi TS Xs 7 


PRINIFD IN GREAT BRITATN BY 
Ricwarp Cray ann Sows, Limiten 
BRUNSWICK STREET, STAMMORD SLRFFI, Ὁ. 
AND BUNGAY, SUBROTK 


LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 
VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED 


Latin Authors. 
APULEIUS. The Golden Ass. (Metamorphoses } 
W. Adlington (1566). Revised by 5. Gaselee. 1 Vol. 


rae CIVIL WARS. Trans by A. G. Peskett. 
1 Vol. 


CATULLUS. Trans. by F. W. Cornish; TIBILLUS. 
Trans. by J. P. Postgate; PERVIGILIUM VENE- 
RIS. Trans. by J. W. Mackail. 1 Vol. 


ee : DE FINIBUS. Trans. by H. Rackham. 
Vol. 


ee DE OFFICIIS. Trans. by Walter Miller. 
ol. 


CICERG: LETTERS TO ATTICUS. Trans. by E Ὁ 
Winstedt. Vols. I and II. 


CONsESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE. Trans. by W. 
Waits (1631). 2 Vols. 


HORACE: ODES AND EPODES. Tians by ὦ. E. 
Bennett. 1 Vol. 


OVID: HEROIDES AND AMORES. Trans. by Giant 
Showerman. 1 Vol. 


PETRONIUS Trans. by M. Heseltine; SHNECA: 
Be nr eee Trans. by W. H. D. Rouse. 
1 Vol. 


PLINY. LETTERS. Melmoth’s Translation revised by 
W. M. L. Hutchinson. 2 Vols. 


“‘PROPERTIUS. Trans by H. E Butler. 1 Vol. 
SUETONIUS. Trans. by J. C Rolfe. 2 Vols. 


TACITUS: DIALOGUS. Trans. by Sir Wm. Peterson ; 
AGRICOLA AND GERMANTA. Trans. by Maurice 
Hutton. 1 Vol. 


TERENCE. Trans. by John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. 
1 


LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY—(Ccontd.) 
Greek Authors, 
ss hema RHODIUS. Trans. by R. C. Seaton. 
ol. 


gee FATHERS, Trans by Kirsopp Lake. 
ols. 


APPIAN’S ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by Horace 
White. 4 Vols. 


DIO CASSIUS: ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by E. 
Cary. Vols. I, {I, and IIT. 


HURIPIDES. Trans. by A. S Way. 4 Vols. 


THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS, 
BION, MOSCHUS). Trans. by J M. Edmonds. 1 Vol 


HESIOD AND THE HOMERIC HYMNS. Trans. by 
H. G. Evelyn-White. 1 Vol. 


JULIAN. Trans. by Wilmer Cave Wright. Vols Iand 11 
LUCIAN. Trans. by A. M. Harmon. Vols. I and II. 


PHILOSTRATUS: THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF 
TYANA. Trans. by F. C Conybeare 2 Vols. 


PINDAR. Trans. by Sir J E. Sandys. 1 Vol. 


PLATO: EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO, PH-EDO. 
PHADRUS. Trans. by H. N. Fowler. 1 Vol. 


PLUTARCH : THE PARALLEL LIVES. Trans. by 
B. Perrin. Vols. [I and II. 


PROCOPIUS. Trans. by H. B. Dewing. Vol. I. 
QUINTUS SMYRNAGUS. Trans by A. 8. Way. 1 Vol 
SOPHOCLES. Trans. by F. Storr. 2 Vols. 


ST. JOHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND IOASAPH 
‘traus. by the Rev. G. R. Woodward and Harold 
Mattingly. 1 Vol. ?? 


Ποὺ : ΟΥ̓ΒΟΡΖΌΙΑ, Trans. by Walter Miller. 
2 Vols. 


DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION 


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN 
NEW' YORK: ἃ. P. PUTNAM’S SONS. 


2 





